Title: Unbelievable Project: John Lennox debates science and God - Has science buried God?
Date: 2013-03-11 14:33
Author: brianblais
Tags: Fine Tuning, Religion, Science, Unbelievable Project
Slug: unbelievable-project-john-lennox-debates-science-and-god-has-science-buried-god

10/13/07 - John Lennox debates science and God - Has science buried God? {#101307-john-lennox-debates-science-and-god-has-science-buried-god}
------------------------------------------------------------------------

As part of the [Unbelievable Project][], I am taking notes and
"arm-chair" responding to each of the [Unbelievable podcast][] episodes
satisfying a set of [simple rules][Unbelievable Project].

For a full RSS Feed of the podcasts [see here][].

### Description of Episode

-   Full Title: *Unbelievable? 13 Oct 2007 - John Lennox debates science
    & God - 13 October 2007 -- Has science buried God?*  

    > Fresh from a US TV debate with Richard Dawkins, Oxford Professor
    > Dr. John Lennox engages with atheist scientist Robert Stovold. 
    > Lennox, who is a Christian, asserts in his book "God's Undertaker
    > - Has science buried God?" that science and philosophy show
    > evidence of a divine designer.  Robert Stovold says the
    > methodology of science is incompatible with such belief.

[Download mp3.][]

-   Justin Brierley - Christian Moderator
-   John Lennox - Christian
-   Robert Stovold - Atheist

### Notes

**Me - this episode was a lot of work, because both debaters were very
strong and the density of information in this episode is very high - a
lot of information per minute. I had to go back and listen to parts many
times. I particularly like Robert's style - he is very calm and
straightforward, never sounding angry or aggressive. I highly recommend
you listen to the entire debate, because I won't be able to cover
everything here.**

Robert - A common theistic line of argument refers to the appearance of
design, and states things like "the eye cannot occur by chance". If you
think evolution is about randomness, then you don't understand
evolution. If you drop a fish and a lion and drop them on the ground, it
is not random which one will survive, and it doesn't require design to
explain this.

Robert - In the Bible "Love" is defined, both in the Old and New
Testament, in such a way that it always prevails, and always helps.
Then, with 99% of the species that ever existed being extinct, this is
not consistent with a loving God. All of this suffering happened well
before any humans, and Fall, or Noah's flood.

John - This is the problem of theodicy. What I would be curious about is
where you even get the idea of right and wrong, because under atheism,
there can be no objective moral standard.

**Me - at this point I was jumping up a screaming. Dodge! Dodge! I'd
heard this dodge before, and essentially it ignores the force of the
argument. Robert followed up well, but then added some comments about
where an atheistic morality (as a social construct) comes from. This
derailed the conversation and John never addressed the point. The point
is that, *if* we assume the Bible is true, then the problem of
suffering, as evidenced by the inefficient and wasteful methods of
evolution, leads to a conflict with a loving God. I don't have to even
believe that evil and good exist to make this argument - it is a *"spin
out the consequences"* of a worldview and show a conflict. Robert
describes very well how evolution gives the appearance of design -
instead of nudging things in the right direction, evolution nudges
things in *"all"* directions and the kills off the directions that don't
work.**  

Robert - the war is between naturalism and supernaturalism not between
atheism and God. science ascribes natural causes to natural effects
(methodological naturalism). It isn't that science assumes God doesn't
exist, it simply doesn't include supernatural explanations.

John - methodological naturalism is the same as methodological theism.
Dawkins says the world is apparently designed, I say it is designed. It
is only in certain areas, not 99.5% of science, that it makes any
difference. there are good gaps and bad gaps. bad gaps are gaps that
science can close. methodological naturalism is ok but it stops you when
the evidence points beyond naturalism. Two *"good gaps"* I would say are
the origin of the universe and the origin of life.

**Me - I'd bet real money that the origin of life is a "bad gap", from
John's perspective. In every case where we had a thorny science problem
that seemed insoluble, and we had to resort to "magic" (i.e. [this
lovely cartoon][]), eventually we have solved it. The origin of life
seems exactly that sort of thing that is amenable to solution. As a
problem, it doesn't suffer from the infinite regress issues from which
origin of the universe solutions can suffer.**

John - in science it is often very difficult to prove a negative,
although there are cases where (within a reasonable doubt) we can do
that. when I receive a paper outlining in 100 pages a design for a
perpetual motion machine, I don't need to read it. Not because I'm being
an abscurantist, but because the conservation of energy (a
*"pro-scriptive law"*) is a principle that has been demonstrated to be
true in all cases, within a reasonably doubt. Now, Sir Peter Meadower
has proposed a conservation of information. nature is very good at
transmitting information, processing and optimizing as is done in
microevolution. where I have difficulty is with the creative process -
those natural processes cannot create information.  

**Me - This is one of the cases where John makes a fundamental science
mistake [see comment below for correction/clarification on this], and
tips his hand to his agenda. In a line, perpetual motion machines do not
violate conservation of energy. They violate the second law of
thermodynamics. Such a basic science error, in my view, disqualifies his
entire scientific credibility - I can't trust that his other scientific
claims, even if I may not have time to track them all down.**

**Also, in a fit of irony, he then goes on to talk about information
which is intricately linked to the second law. It is absolutely not true
that natural processes produce no new information. For example, the
natural development of nylonase is a good example within our lifetime -
bacteria evolved a new enzyme to specifically break down the completely
artificial substance known as nylon.**

**Just as a the formation of ice moves water from a disordered to a more
ordered state, the process of natural selection moves species to a
ordered state -- more in-line with the environment. Information
production, i.e. entropy reduction, happens all of the time in the
natural world.**

John - I believe that the fact that the universe is rationally
intelligible is evidence for God. Atheism has no explanation for it, but
theism does. Thus, support for God comes from the bits of science that
we *do* know and not the bits we don't. He is amazed that scientists
stop short of the most important question, simply calling it a brute
fact.

**Me - What is the alternative? Any universe with sustained structures
should be intelligible. A non-intelligible universe would be one with no
patterns - completely random, and thus no structure would ever form.
There is no way we could be thinking beings in an unintelligible
universe. It is also possible that one could not even have an object
that one could label a *"universe"* without it being intelligible.  
  
**

John - Reductionism undermines the notion of inteligibility.
Intelligibility demands an explanation. *"I don't bring god into
science, [...] science points to god in its very existence"*

John - On the fine tuning argument, the constants of nature have to be
within *very* close tolerances to get carbon based life. An easier
example is more local. Taking the Earth, if the Earth were spinning
faster we'd all fly off, if slower then we'd all bake to death. If we
were too close to the Sun, it'd be too hot, too far and it's too cold.
These things have to be in very close tolerances. The standard Find
Tuning observation takes this to the Nth degree. This is not an argument
from gaps, its from our knowledge.  

Robert. Theists are trying to have it both ways. On the one hand God's
goal is to create life and on the other hand if it had been slightly
different then life wouldn't be possible. Life's very rare. Imagine a
patio with weeds in the cracks. The weeds would say that the cracks were
put there to support them, ignoring the rest of the patio.

Robert. As for fine tuning, we don't know if the constants are
twiddle-able. Theists will have an explanation either way. If they are
twiddle-able then God was so good to twiddle them correctly. If not,
then the argument would be that God knew what he wanted and dint need to
make a university with changeable constants. Most theistic arguments are
like this - you can explain anything, and thus explain nothing.

Lennox. Most scientists respond that the fine tuning does require an
explanation, and often put forward the multiverse explanation even
though there is not a shred of evidence for it. The theistic explanation
is the obvious one that everyone admits, but then they try to come up
with another explanation.

Robert - once you abandon the law of cause and effect, you can't do
science.

**Me - I agree with Robert the whole way here. I would add, however,
that it may be the case that these constants are in fact *not
independent*. Many physicists will state that they are independent,
because in current theory they are, but they may not be in some future
theory. Thus, it might be that not only are they not twiddle-able but
they might not be *separately* twiddle-able, and thus life may be
possible in all possible universes. Finally, as an analogy, if we look
at pre-Copernican astronomy with all of the epicycles on epicycles, a
scientist at that time would find it very difficult to fathom that all
of that independent detail could be derived from two equations (Newton's
3rd Law, and the theory of gravitation). Another analogy would be the
independent spectral lines of each type of material, used in the 1800's
for spectroscopy, being explained by the single Schoedinger equation! We
have many examples of so-called independent observations not actually
being independent when we have a full understanding.**

  [Unbelievable Project]: https://brianblais.wordpress.com/2013/02/27/unbelievable-project-a-non-believers-armchair-perspective-on-six-years-of-christian-debates/
  [Unbelievable podcast]: http://www.premierradio.org.uk/shows/saturday/unbelievable.aspx
  [see here]: http://ondemand.premier.org.uk/unbelievable/AudioFeed.aspx
  [Download mp3.]: http://media.premier.org.uk/unbelievable/8547ae5c-d48e-4221-b3a5-68d0df27df2a.mp3
  [this lovely cartoon]: http://www.evaluationtoolkit.org/illustrations/4/original/miracle_cartoon.jpg?1231530108
