Title: A question for theists: why do you not believe UFOs are alien spacecraft?
Date: 2013-07-13 01:12
Author: brianblais
Slug: a-question-for-theists-why-do-you-not-believe-ufos-are-alien-spacecraft

Now, I am really not trying to be snarky here, so please hear me out.
 Try to honestly ask yourself the question:

> what evidence would make you reasonably sure that a UFO claim is in
> fact an alien spacecraft?

Would it take 1 photo or 100?  Would it take 4 testimonials from
eyewitnesses, or 50?  Would it depend who reports it, like the New York
Times or NASA?  Would you need someone to stake their reputation on it,
or their life?  Would you require physical evidence, or would a report
suffice?  What would it take?  If you really wrap your head around this
question, and come up with a possible list of evidence that would
possibly sway your opinion, as well as the reasons why that evidence
would be convincing, you'll start to understand what an atheist thinks
of the resurrection of Jesus.

When the day is done, the only evidence for the resurrection comes from
(at best) four (so-called) eyewitness testimonials written decades after
the events and the possible (although extremely dubious) reports of a
handful of people believing so strongly they they laid their life down
for it.  There is no physical evidence, and no more than  a handful of
extra-biblical references (again, with dubious or weak content).  From
all of the arguments I've heard, this seems convincing to Christians.

Compared to UFO reports, for every eye-witness claimed for the
resurrection, I can produce 100 witnesses for alien spacecraft - with
direct reports within hours of the events.  For every supposed apostle
who is claimed to have been martyred, I can produce several people
giving their lives for the belief in alien spacecraft (think, Heaven's
Gate here).  For every extra-biblical reference, I can give you
thousands of photos, metal implants and alien abduction therapy session
reports - all of which is stronger evidence than any of the
extra-biblical references to Jesus (some of which are forged).  Yet,
despite all of this, I am not at all convinced that UFOs are alien
spacecraft, and neither are most people.

Why is it then, that people are convinced by the --far less-- evidence
for the resurrection?  What's the difference?
