Title: Polar Bears, Data, Opinions, and Global Warming
Date: 2009-12-22 16:16
Author: brianblais
Slug: polar-bears-data-opinions-and-global-warming

So I had a nice discussion with a student, who was confused after
receiving some opposing viewpoints on Global Warming from different
professors in a relatively short time period. In one of the statements,
I had claimed that there were more polar bears now than there were 20-30
years ago. In another statement, another professor claimed that the
polar bears were dying off due to arctic ice retreat due to global
warming. This is actually a nice case of "follow the data", where the
problem is defined in a relatively concrete way. Another example of this
is the question "is it warmer now than 1000 years ago?". On the second
question, [www.realclimate.org][] would say "yes, it is warmer than 1000
years ago" and cite the proxy data, etc... w[ww.climateaudit.org][]
would say (I believe) "maybe, maybe not" and cite the issues with the
analysis of the proxy data.

Now, back to the polar bears. From the [polarbearsinternational][] it is
confirmed that the population of polar bears from the 1960's was very
low, in the few thousands, and in the early 2000s was up to between
22000-25000. These are also reflected in the [usgs site on polar
bears][] where you can actually get some of the data.

If you go to the polar bear specialist group which advises for the IPCC,
you can find a [table of the status of the polar bear in various
regions][]. The problem with this table is that there is a column titled
"Observed or predicted trend". Hello? Why would you mix observed trends
and predicted trends in a table? Just show me the data. Anyway, there is
a document [here][] which has an explanation of the projections, and
possibly some data, although I haven't read the 200 pages of the
document to see if it is buried in the text (there is no figure with the
data...just model predictions). I'd love to find a straightforward
presentation of the estimates of the current numbers of polar bears,
complete with error-bars to denote uncertainty.

It seems reasonable that with the decline of the arctic ice that the
polar bear populations can be affected, some more than others, but the
role of hunting (the regulation of which caused the surge in the bear
numbers from the 1970s) still plays a role can is difficult to
disentangle...I've seen unsubstantiated claims that the areas with the
decrease are primarily hunting areas. I haven't confirmed this, but this
could also be the fact that ice retreat will be more substantial in the
more habitable areas, where there would be more people. Correlation does
not equal cause and effect.

So, it is a fact that there are many more polar bears now than, say
30-40 years ago. It can also be true, although I have difficulty
tracking the data down in a readable form, that arctic ice retreat could
impact polar bear numbers adversely.

One question that I have now is, if it was warmer 1000 years ago, is
there evidence that there was a significant retreat of the ice back
then? If that is the case, then the polar bear scare is just that...a
scare. Again, many of global warming consequences that are being
reported are tied to the question of the size, extent, and effects of
the Medieval Warming Period. That's why, in my opinion, that is the most
important question of all.

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
![]

</div>

  [www.realclimate.org]: http://www.realclimate.org
  [ww.climateaudit.org]: http://ww.climateaudit.org
  [polarbearsinternational]: http://www.polarbearsinternational.org/ask-the-experts/population/
  [usgs site on polar bears]: http://www.usgs.gov/newsroom/special/polar_bears/
  [table of the status of the polar bear in various regions]: http://pbsg.npolar.no/en/status/status-table.html
  [here]: http://pbsg.npolar.no/export/sites/pbsg/en/docs/PBSG14proc.pdf
  []: https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/6965073194684424505-3918137871058777698?l=bblais.blogspot.com
