Title: "Science Refutes God" Debate
Date: 2012-12-11 13:49
Author: brianblais
Slug: science-refutes-god-debate

I just finished watching the "Science Refutes God" debate.  Although I
am not a huge fan of Krauss and Shermer, I thought they did a decent
job.  As I was watching, I nearly jumped out of my seat with some
arm-chair quaterbacking..."ask this next!!!".  D'Sousa claimed that the
Bible predicted the Big Bang (i.e. universe from nothing) thousands of
years before science.  He also admitted that the day and night before
the Sun was not true (around 1 hr and 20 minutes in), was refuted by
science, and was really the product of a fundamentalist reading of the
bible.  The next question out of Krauss' mouth should have been, "by
what criterea do you decide what is true in the Bible?"  What D'Sousa
was doing was saying that, where we have learned things from science and
one can plausibly read the Bible in the same way, then that is true in
the Bible.  Otherwise, it is false in the Bible.  In this case, the
Bible is making **no** predictions, because it has many claims which
cannot be demonstrated to be true except through science.  It's like you
rattle off a whole series of random digits, like (and I did this by
computer):

3, 6, 4, 3, 1, 0, 2, 9, 7, 8, 6, 4, 1, 1, 6, 8, 9, 5, 3, 4, 0, 6, 9, 9,
4, 6, 4, 9, 6, 9, 3, 8, 6, 8, 3, 9, 6, 9, 8, 1, 4, 0, 9, ...

and then noting, hey, this starts with a "3", and look at some of the
other digits (in bold):

**3**, 6, 4, 3, **1**, 0, 2, 9, 7, 8, 6, **4**, **1**, 1, 6, 8, 9,
**5**, 3, 4, 0, 6, **9**, 9, 4, **6**, 4, 9, 6, 9, 3, 8, 6, 8, 3, 9, 6,
9, 8, 1, 4, 0, 9, ...

you see the digits of pi!  (a small note - I was planning on running the
random number generator many times, to make sure that this example
started with 3, to make my point about the starting value, and lo! it
came up the first time anyway!)

 

 

[youtube http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RKNd_S3iXfs&w=560&h=315]
