Title: What is good in religion
Date: 2012-03-05 13:53
Author: brianblais
Slug: what-is-good-in-religion

I was asked recently if I thought there was anything good about
religion. I felt it was an important enough question to give it a fair
amount of thought. Coincidentally, I listened to a podcast that dealt
with some of these issues. The podcast is called [Unbelievable][], and
the particular episode is called [Should atheists be more religious?
Alain de Botton and James Orr][]. I like this podcast in general,
because they pit the religious against the non-religious in an informal
discussion for about an hour and a half. This particular episode raised
the issue of religions' usefulness, and what can be borrowed by
atheists.

One of the points was the contrast between the Christian view of
humanity and the view of humanity as is often suggested by secularists.
In the Christian view, humans are essentially fallen creatures, are
naturally evil and need the grace of God to save them from this. The
main secular view, which seemingly has been espoused since around the
1960s, asserts that people are naturally good and that culture is the
dominant force which turns them bad, and further that through rational
analysis one can overcome this cultural influence as science transcends
all cultural barriers. This just doesn't gel with basic observations, I
feel, and thus there is a benefit to the Christian view as a metaphor.
If you've ever been to a daycare, it is quite obvious that children are
naturally bad, or at least have more bad than good, and need to be saved
from this.

Now, we don't need to believe in a magic garden and a talking snake, or
assert that this observation of humanity has as a consequence that the
Earth is 6000 years old, in order to draw value from it. In the same way
that we draw value from Shakespeare, we can draw some value from the
Genesis story (although I think there have to be better stories, which
place women in a more favorable light!). Honestly, I think one can make
a reasonable argument from evolution that reflects the \`\`fallen
being'' idea. Essentially, we have a balance between selfish desires
(clearly advantageous) and social desires (also advantageous, in social
animals). A proper balance needs to be made, and there is a spectrum of
selfish impulses, and the desire to suppress them in various ways. I
think some of the rituals of religion help to remind us of this. Even
gathering as a group on Sundays is an example of this - one is more
likely to reflect on helping others when one is regularly together in a
group.

It is true that there are things of benefit which, in the past, have
only been the purview of religions. Getting together regularly,
meditative rituals, ritual individual sacrifice (not human or animal
sacrifice! think Lent here...), and traditions of giving (think
Christmas) are examples of this sort of thing. Notice, however, that
none of these *requires* the inclusion of superstitious claims, or
claims about the cosmos or our role in it.

In addition to the benefits, there are a number of costs associated with
these same examples that get dragged along with the religion. The blind
following of authorities, the dogmatic adherence to invisible
\`\`realities'', and the divisive nature of the practices are a few of
these.

I believe that there are ways of getting the benefits with minimizing
the costs. I also believe that the *truth* of claims is intricately
related to their *usefulness*. What I mean is if you have a system of
belief that does not reflect reality, then reality has a habit of making
itself known, even if it might take a while. Finally, I think there is a
lot to learn about what is beneficial to human mental well-being and
societal well-being, and that some of these benefits currently are most
clearly demonstrated in a religious context. I don't think that they
need to be exclusively achieved in a religious context.

  [Unbelievable]: http://www.premier.org.uk/unbelievable
  [Should atheists be more religious? Alain de Botton and James Orr]: http://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/unbelievable/id267142101#
