Title: Are Science and Religion Incompatible?
Date: 2010-12-01 10:59
Author: brianblais
Slug: are-science-and-religion-incompatible

I've recently found [pointofinquiry.org][], which has a lot of very
interesting talks about science and religion, so it got me thinking
again.  Some of the more interesting talks are:

-   <http://www.pointofinquiry.org/richard_dawkins_science_and_the_new_atheism/>
-   <http://www.pointofinquiry.org/ann_druyan_carl_sagan_and_the_varieties_of_scientific_experience/>
-   <http://www.pointofinquiry.org/pz_myers_jennifer_michael_hecht_chris_mooney_new_atheism_or_accommodation/>

First off, I need to point out that I am an atheist as well as a
scientist.  Did my learning of science undermine my religion (I was
raised Roman Catholic)?  Was I jaded about religion before learning
science?  Does science promote atheism?  These are some of the questions
one needs to consider with respect to these ideas.  Given my one data
point, I can only state a correlation, not a cause-and-effect: that as I
got older, and learned more science, I got less religious.  However, I
can point out several observations I've made about the interplay between
religion and science.  I think some of the hard-line atheists, in their
own personal zeal, make claims about science that are overreaching and
not entirely correct.  I also think that the accommodationist
perspective, stating that science is perfectly compatible with religion
is also not correct.  Here are my main thoughts.

### Science *is* in conflict with some religions

If you believe that the world is 8000 years old, then you are wrong.
 Almost all branches of science, from physics, chemistry, biology and
geology, agree that the Earth is billions of years old.  There really is
extremely little wiggle room there.  Of course, one can always say that
God made the world *appear* billions of years old, but in fact it really
is only 8000 years old.  If you do that, then you could just as easily
state that the world was made yesterday.  Further, it is a challenge to
think of a reason why this deception would be need to be done.  Finally,
from a scientific point of view, it is content-free (CF): it makes no
measurable predictions, does not suggest the next measurements to be
done, nor is it testable in any way.  Science has demonstrated,
historically, that CF statements have always turned out to be the
equivalent of nothing.

If your religion depends on insisting that the world is 8000 years old,
then science is in direct conflict with it.  Those religions that have
put themselves in the cross-hairs of science, by making specific
statements about the universe, are making the error of making the
religion able to be falsified.  Historically speaking, this is exactly
what has always happened with testable religious claims: science shows
them to be wrong.  The religion then has two choices

1.  reject science (usually hypocritically at the same time reaping all
    the benefits of science, such as longer life, better health, and
    increased technology)
2.  call those statements metaphorical, and remove the testable part of
    the religion that was rejected by science

Most liberal religious faiths have tended to choose (2).  The Catholic
Church, for instance, has a pro-evolutiuon stance and is in-line with
science on many things (a departure from historical behavior).  In
choice (2), the Genesis creation story is allegorical and not literal,
and thus not in conflict with modern biology, especially evolution.
 They merely state that God had a hand in the process, perhaps, for
example, injecting souls into humans some million years ago.  The
conservative religious faiths which believe in the literal Genesis
story, with creation in 7 days about 8000 years ago,  try to replace
evolution with creationism (in the form of, so-called, intelligent
design).  They are just plain wrong.  Further, because they've stated
that their religions depend on evolution being false, they have thus
made it possible for science to demonstrate they are wrong.  They have
then created the conflict between their religion and science.

Other religious claims that are testable, and shown to be false,
include:

-   faith healing
-   intercessory prayer
-   special creation

### Science *is not* in conflict with some other religions...but with a caveat {style="font-size:1.17em;"}

There are many scientists who are religious.  Some relatively famous
modern ones include [Ken Miller][], a Catholic biologist from Brown
University who testified in the [Dover Evolution vs Intelligent
Design][] trial, [Francis Collins][], the geneticist, and the physicist
[Freeman Dyson][].  In each of these cases, we have to be careful in
defining their belief.  Conservative Christians will often point to
highly prominent scientists (such as Albert Einsten) who are religious
as evidence of no conflict between science and religion.  However
***none*** of these people support the anti-science agenda of the
conservative Christians, and most believe in a vague, impersonal "God",
such as  "God" representing the mystery in the universe.  A far cry from
the person-like entity described in the Bible, but by using the same
word (God), these scientists have inadvertently played into the hands of
people who would like to misuse the belief for their own purposes.

What is comes down to, as you look at religious scientists [(which
represent a very small minority)][], there are two types:

1.  scientists that are in fields far away from the "big-picture"
    questions (like, say, material science) and can thus maintain two
    opposite viewpoints at the same time.  People are very good at
    compartmentalizing their thinking.
2.  scientists who have scientifically untestable religious beliefs.
     this includes the "God=universe" belief, or some vague spiritual
    belief.  Ken Miller falls into this category too...when asked
    whether Jesus had a Y chromosome (which could test for the virgin
    birth, for example), he says that he just doesn't have any data on
    that.  Even though some of his tests are, in theory, testable they
    aren't testable right now and perhaps, practically, never.

### But shouldn't science stay out of religious issues?  Don't they speak about different things? {style="font-size:1.17em;"}

Stephen J. Gould (the great) used to refer to "non-overlapping
magisteria" when speaking about science and religion.  Freeman Dyson
refers to science and religion as "two windows that people look through,
trying to understand the big universe outside, trying to understand why
we are here."  I have already touched on part of the problem with this:
where religion is **testable**, it has been shown to be **false**. All
that is left are the untestable parts.  To me, this content-free
religion is the same as not believing in anything.  Perhaps it gives
someone comfort to believe in a vague, impersonal spirit "out there",
but I dislike using the word "God" when referring to the mystery and
wonder of the universe itself. Using this word communicates something
very different to different people, and implies something that I believe
is unwarranted.

Richard Dawkins, in one of the point of inquiry interviews, shows that
this non-overlapping magisteria is really a farce.  He puts it this
way...imagine if, at some point, we uncover archeological evidence with
some molecular biology that gave you evidence for, say, the virgin birth
of Jesus.  Do you think that the Christian religions in the world would
say, "Oh no!  Non-overlaping magisteria!  We can't use science to speak
about religious issues!".  Of course not!  They'd be screaming it from
every church.  It's only because there ***is no evidence for any
religious claims***that we posit the non-overlap of religion and
science.

So, in a nut-shell, where religion and science meet, religion either
directly agrees with science (in which case it is redundant) or it is
wrong.  Most of the testable religious claims have been shown to be
wrong.  Where they don't meet, religion is content-free.  If someone
decides to find comfort in that, then that is their issue, and science
can't really speak to it.  I just don't find any value in it.

### Religious vs Scientific Thinking {style="font-size:1.17em;"}

At its core, however, religious thinking and scientific thinking are
nearly opposites.  Religious thinking relies on anecdotes, statements
from authority, faith without evidence, and mistakes of causation from
correlation.  Each of these mistakes arise from common human failings of
reason and perception, for which the scientific methods have been
developed to avoid.  To do proper science one does not rely on anecdotes
or authority, other than nature as the final arbiter.  Evidence is
everything, and certain knowledge is never achieved in science (as
opposed to religion).  So it is no wonder that the more scientific you
are, the less appeal religion tends to have.  But it also makes you less
susceptible to the various guises of pseudoscience and less susceptible
to being hoodwinked by cranks and quacks.

It is my opinion, then, that the best remedy for religion is simply to
teach as much science as possible and let the religion problem work
itself out as a result.  I don't think that the in-your-face strategies
of the new atheists, such as Dawkins, are particularly effective at
reducing religion.  It has a purpose for rallying the troops, bringing
closeted atheists out, so I wouldn't dissuade him from this approach if
he feels that that is the primary outcome he wants.  I also don't think
we should compromise and say there is no conflict between science and
religion, which leads to pandering for political reasons with the truth
as a casualty.  There *are* fundamental conflicts between many religions
and science, and those should be pointed out even if it is uncomfortable
for those believers.  Science isn't in the business of making people
feel comfortable with their beliefs.  Thats the role of religion.

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
![]

</div>

  [pointofinquiry.org]: http://www.pointofinquiry.org
  [Ken Miller]: http://www.millerandlevine.com/km/
  [Dover Evolution vs Intelligent Design]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kitzmiller_v._Dover_Area_School_District
  [Francis Collins]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Collins_(geneticist)
  [Freeman Dyson]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freeman_Dyson
  [(which represent a very small minority)]: http://bblais.blogspot.com/2010/06/religion-and-scientists.html
  []: https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/6965073194684424505-8845491710280115769?l=bblais.blogspot.com
