Title: Bayes and Hiccups: Practical working solutions that no one seems to know
Date: 2012-01-14 23:51
Author: brianblais
Slug: bayes-and-hiccups-practical-working-solutions-that-no-one-seems-to-know

So I've been interested in Bayesian analysis [for some time][]. It has a
fascinating history, described in detail in ["The theory that would not
die" by McGrayne][] - a truly wonderful read. A nice summary can be
[found here][]. The funny thing is that, upon looking into Bayesian
analysis, it all seemed so obvious to me...not trivial, but obvious.
It's just a mathematical way of writing:

Initial Belief + New Data -\> Improved Belief

It is a straightforward application of probability theory, has many
intuitive examples, and the only competition (so-called orthodox or
frequentist stats) can be shown to have serious, obvious flaws. Although
in some fields Bayesian analysis is the standard, introductory classes
in statistics are still dominated by the frequentist culture. This is an
example of a practical working solution being upstaged by something
else, something inferior. I often wonder, why isn't everyone a Bayesian?

So, then we come to hiccups. One thing about hiccups is that it is
likely to be a behavior [inherited by our fish ancestors][]! How cool is
that? Anyway, you ask 10 people and they will give you 10 different
solutions to getting rid of hiccups. Usually this involves imbibing a
large quantity of liquid, or doing something either annoying or
uncomfortable. When I was young, my mother taught be that if you drink a
small amount (no more than 2 swallows) of a carbonated beverage it gets
rid of the hiccups...instantly. It has worked every time I've tried, but
I don't have carbonated beverages at home much, and when I do I don't
want to waste a whole can for 2 or 3 swallows. Then, one of our
children's preschool teachers taught me this one, which has worked every
time, and in every person I've told it to. I have yet to see a counter
example. It's bizarrely simple, and I wonder how it works. Here are the
steps:

1.  take a sip of water

2.  say, out loud, the word "one"

3.  take another sip

4.  say, out loud, the word "two"

5.  \$latex {\\vdots }\$

By the time you're at 9, they're gone. You may not even need to get up
to nine, but still, 9 small sips of water is not bad. This is a
practical solution, which seems to have no counter example, and is
superior to every other solution I've found...just like Bayesian
analysis!

Well, perhaps the link is a little weak, but it's worth considering. Are
there other examples of clearly superior practices that just aren't the
ones that are known?

  [for some time]: http://web.bryant.edu/~bblais/pdf/bryant_pres.pdf
  ["The theory that would not die" by McGrayne]: http://www.amazon.com/Theory-That-Would-Not-Die/dp/0300169698
  [found here]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/774/a_history_of_bayes_theorem/
  [inherited by our fish ancestors]: http://richarddawkins.net/articles/2125
