Title: Closed to the supernatural?
Date: 2011-12-20 15:41
Author: brianblais
Slug: closed-to-the-supernatural

I have often heard the charge that critics of the concept of God are
simply closed to the possibility of a transcendent being, or of
miracles, or of the supernatural in general. If you closed to these
concepts from the beginning, then no amount of evidence will sway you. I
was thinking about this, and what my perspective is, and I came up with
a few thoughts.

My first reaction is that I don't know what the terms mean. For example,
someone says that I am closed to the idea of a "trogglet". What does it
mean? I am not closed, nor open, to the idea of a "trogglet" simply
because it is not defined. Ok, so define it!

1.  Definition of a transcendent being:

    <p>
    > Transcendence refers to the aspect of God's nature which is wholly
    > independent of (and removed from) the physical universe.
    > [[wikipedia][]]
    > </p>

2.  definition of supernatural:

    <p>
    > The supernatural is that which is not subject to the laws of
    > nature, or more figuratively, that which is said to exist above
    > and beyond nature. [[wikipedia][1]]
    > </p>

3.  definition of miracle

    <p>
    > A miracle often denotes an event attributed to divine
    > intervention. Alternatively, it may be an event attributed to a
    > miracle worker, saint, or religious leader. A miracle is sometimes
    > thought of as a perceptible interruption of the laws of nature.
    > Others suggest that a god may work with the laws of nature to
    > perform what people perceive as miracles.[1] Theologians say that,
    > with divine providence, God regularly works through created nature
    > yet is free to work without, above, or against it as well.[2]
    > [[wikipedia][2]]
    > </p>

I would content that these definitions aren't particularly specific, but
let's raise another issue: how would you know that something
supernatural exists, or a supernatural event has happened? Since we can
only be aware of physical effects, we have three choices:

1.  supernatural events occur only supernaturally (i.e. no impact on
    physical reality)

2.  supernatural events have some impact on physical reality and the
    impact works *within* physical law

3.  supernatural events have some impact on physical reality and the
    impact goes beyond physical law

If you want to claim choice 1, then there is no difference between a
supernatural event and no event at all (i.e. it is content-free). If you
want to claim choice 2, then there is no way (even in principle!) to
tell whether the cause is supernatural, and thus is also content-free.
That leaves the final choices, which perhaps is testable (in theory) but
you then must rule out *any and all possible natural interpretations of
those events*. Essentially it boils down to a God-of-the-Gaps arguments,
because you're simply left with "I can't think of any way that this
event could have happened naturally".

The interesting thing about this is not that we have come to the
conclusion that the existence of supernatural events is either
content-free or God-of-the-Gaps, but that the purported "Gaps" that are
often claimed are so trivial, and already filled, that it undermines the
entire endeavor. Design in biology is solved by evolution, regardless of
the protestations of the creationists. The origin of the universe is
systematically being solved by the cosmologists, with no help from the
theists. I'd love to see something that really rises to the level of a
miracle, like the 10 commandments etched in Pluto or something. Although
technically a God-of-the-Gaps argument, it would be very interesting
indeed! However, we are given no such evidence.

It is reminiscent of the UFO enthusiasts. We'd love to see actual
objects from aliens, or actual communication from aliens, or convincing
video. Instead, we're given bad evidence after bad evidence.

  [wikipedia]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transcendence_(religion)
  [1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supernatural
  [2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miracle
