Title: God does Not Exist, Clearly
Date: 2012-11-26 10:34
Author: brianblais
Slug: god-does-not-exist-clearly

In [a facebook conversation][], Matthew Bell claimed that "the evidence
for the existence of God has been made so clear that any who do not
believe in it are without excuse before him and are in denial of the
evidence."  He then [pointed me to a lecture by William Lane
Craig][] (WLC), where this evidence is laid out.  Let's look at this
supposedly clear evidence.  

The Argument
------------

WLC starts by looking at 7 things that point to something more than
naturalism.  I interject a few criticisms, but many more can be found
online.  My main point is stated at the bottom of this post.

​1. "Why is there something rather than nothing?"

<span style="white-space:pre;"> </span>"Everything that exists has an
explanation, either in the necessity of its own being, or in a cause."
 He claims that this point is plausible, at least more than its
contradiction, and then proceeds to give a straightforward,
everyday-sort of analogy.  I think we have learned in the last 100 years
that these analogies are completely useless once you move a little bit
away from everyday experience - really big, really small, really fast,
really old, etc...

He continues with "Some things exist necessarily (say, numbers) without
any cause.  All other things have an external cause (say, mountains,
planets, etc...)."  He then says that it seems plausible that the
explanation of the universe is an external cause.  Why?  No reason is
given.  He then goes on to state that that cause must be transcendent
and personal.  The cause must be greater than the uiniverse, and thus
 cannot be physical or material.  Only two kinds of things are
non-physical: an abstract object and an intelligent mind (i.e. an
unbodied consciousness).  Why only these two?  No attempt to expand this
list is given.  Can you claim that the mind could even exist without
material?  No support for is given.  These are simply asserted.

​2. Origin of the universe.  Does the universe have a beginning?  Here
he uses his standard rant against the actual infinite (transfinite
arithmetic), then introduces the Big Bang evidence, and then the Borde,
Guth, and Vilenkin theorem.  A nice treatment of this can be found
[here][], but there are many others online.

An appeal is made to the "out of nothing, nothing comes" as very
successful in science - again, ignoring the uncaused events in quantum
physics, to which Vilinkin himself references in his original paper. 

<span style="white-space:pre;">He continues with, "the cause must be
c</span>hangeless, timeless, spaceless, and personal".  Again, he says
that it is "plausibly" personal.  "How else could a timeless cause give
rise to a temporal effect like a beginning?"  A theme is happening - at
each stage of his argument he is appealing to our ordinary sense of
things, our incredulity, and our lack of any curiousity.  

​3. Fine tuning argument.  His only response to the physical necessity
of these constants being what they are is "the physical necessity of the
constants being fine tuned is implausible because 'these constants are
independent in the theory'".  This is entirely unconvicing, given that
the theory is known to be incomplete!  True, right now, the constants
are indendent but that is simply because they are not derived in any way
from a more fundamental understanding.  

​4. Argument from objective moral values and duties.  I think [Sam
Harris' arguments for objective morality][], based on science, are more
convincing than Craig's here.

​5. Argument from the "greatest possible conceivable being".  This
argument is essentially "If I can imagine it, it must exist" (yes, I
know that's an oversimplification) He claims that this entire argument,
except the first point "God could possible exist",  is uncontentious.
 He then says that the atheist must demonstrate that the concept of God
is incoherent (like a married bachelor) to demonstrate that God could
not possibly exist.  He then argues from incredulity (again) - "what do
you think?"  "It seems to me that an all-good, all powerful being is
coherent.", etc...  I can't imagine anyone is ever convinced by such
wordplay.

​6. Historical details of Jesus.  WLC claims that most historials agree
with the following three historical points:

<span style="white-space:pre;"><span style="white-space:pre;"> </span>
</span>a) empty tomb

<span style="white-space:pre;"><span style="white-space:pre;"> </span>
</span>b) postmortem appearances

<span style="white-space:pre;"><span style="white-space:pre;"> </span>
</span>c) transformation of the desciples (i.e they
were<span style="white-space:pre;"> </span>willing to die for them.)

My first response, as I was listening to this was, whoa!  We just jumped
about 13 billion years!  Up to this point we were talking about the
origins of matter and the universe, and now we jump to a mere 2000 years
ago.  I really like the response by [Robert M Price here][], where he
deals quite well with the development of legendary material. 

​7. Personal experience of God.  WLC admits this isn't evidence.  

The Point
---------

It is not my point to criticize WLC arguments for their content.  I've
sketched some criticisms here, as they appear to me, but my main
contention is that this evidence is *not clear evidence for God*.
 Matthew Bell claimed that "the evidence for the existence of God has
been made so clear that any who do not believe in it are without excuse
before him and are in denial of the evidence.", and yet this evidence is
not at all clear.  It relates either to the edge of our understanding on
cosmology, 2000 year old texts written decades after the events by
people who do not claim to be eyewitnesses, or "feel-good" feelings when
you do something nice for someone or pray.   In each case the evidence
is either at our ignorance or our subjectivity, and not clear.  

So, what would I want?  For example, before Darwin, there was clear
evidence for design.  Any person could easily see it with their eyes, it
was demonstrable in, literally, millions of ways.  Watching a beaver
build a dam, or a parsitic wasp infect a caterpillar, the match of
function and form was truly obvious.  Of course, once Darwin
demonstrated that this could be explained without a designer, it ceased
to be evidence for a designer - but it was clear evidence at the time.
 So-called faith-healings would also provide clear evidence, if they
could be repeated and not easily explained with human psychology and the
science of placebo, etc...  It would be evidence that anyone could
approach and deal with, and would point beyond the natural world
(perhaps).  However, this evidence seems to retreat under the slightest
skeptical scrutiny.   

How about evidence for something else, perhaps not an everyday
phenomenon?  What about the Big Bang?  Is there clear evidence for it?
 Yes!  Of course, it's a little more work to see it, but I can get
middle-school students to be able to do the math, measuring red-shifts,
and calculate the age of the universe - from real data!  This is clear
evidence - the very thing that is lacking when we are talking about the
supposed creator of the universe who supposedly still acts in the world.

 

 

  [a facebook conversation]: http://brianblais.wordpress.com/2012/11/25/a-longish-discussion-on-facebook-about-god-science-and-philosophy/
  [pointed me to a lecture by William Lane Craig]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=KbbE8ZLzcRk
  [here]: http://debunkingwlc.wordpress.com/2010/07/14/borde-guth-vilenkin/
  [Sam Harris' arguments for objective morality]: http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=video&cd=2&cad=rja&ved=0CEIQtwIwAQ&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ted.com%2Ftalks%2Fsam_harris_science_can_show_what_s_right.html&ei=qJy0UM-vM-Xw0gG90oD4BQ&usg=AFQjCNEj9tFXYKdx8uZ_XVjOYruVQUB1RA
  [Robert M Price here]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVMgvw4QV4g&feature=relmfu
