Title: A modest proposal about uncertainty
Date: 2011-01-29 16:35
Author: brianblais
Slug: a-modest-proposal-about-uncertainty

Joan Roughgarden in [Beyond Belief][] made a very astute observation of
a problem, and then proposed a lousy solution to it. The problem she was
addressing had to do with the public perception of evolution as
something quite uncertain scientifically (“theory vs fact”). She
observed that the public sees science changing its stance on many
things, especially in medicine. One day, you should eat bran. The next,
bran is bad for you. The next, bran is good for you again. As a result
the public observes that *some* sciences are uncertain, and can’t
distinguish one field from another or one type of claim from another, so
they apply doubt to *all* of science even when it is not warranted by
the science. Her solution involves using religious analogies,
interpreting phrases in the Bible to explain things like natural
selection and mutations, in order to communicate it to a group of people
who share and value that vocabulary. Dawkins rightly chews her out for
this approach, pointing out how far she is stretching the meaning of the
phrases just to fit her philosophy.

The problem she is stating, however, is quite real. How can we expect
the public to make decisions about medicine, global warming, evolution,
the big bang, etc... when they (somewhat rightly, somewhat wrongly)
observe that the scientists themselves are arguing about it? The
Intelligent Design folks are currently using this observation to sow
doubt with the public in their efforts to “teach the controversy” of
evolution to inject creationism into the schools. It is a failure of the
scientists, and the media that covers them, to communicate with the
public. Can we do better?

I have a proposal, which I’ll sketch out in a toy example. The problem
is not the communication of facts, or even of the procedures of science.
The problem is with the communication of *uncertainties*. In day to day
life, we easily handle claims with different levels of uncertainties.
The sun rises in the east each morning has low uncertainty. The claims
of the auto salesman or the politician have higher uncertainty.
Quantifying it is, of course, more challenging but the qualitative
features of uncertainty are known to nearly everyone. So scientists and
journalists really need to take efforts to communicate the uncertainty
of every claim, not just the fact of the claim or how the new
observations differ from the old observations. How could this be done? I
think, at least roughly, one should include a plot of the probability
distribution with any claim. One doesn’t need to know advanced math to
see the picture. If every claim is accompanied by a plot of the
uncertainties, the public will get used to reading them. Let me
demonstrate with a toy example.

Say, I am trying to determine the origin year of homo sapiens. I realize
there isn’t just one year, and there is a process, but it is not much
harder to include those in this simple analysis. I have several homo
sapiens fossils where I’ve measured the age, which allows me to
calculate my best guess of the age, and the distribution of my
uncertainty shown here.

![blah2-2011-01-29-11-35.png][]

I’ve used a normal, Gaussian, distribution here although in fact it
probably should be something skewed left and probably a lot flatter to
reflect our greater uncertainty with age, and that we have other
observations that put confident lower limits on the origin of homo
sapiens. Again, the details aren’t important because all attempts at
clarifying the distribution only further help with communicating the
uncertainty to the public. A few observations are in order here:

1.  there are many possible values for the origin that lie well outside
    of our data yet have non-zero probability
2.  Our “best guess” is around the middle of this distribution, but it
    really can’t be interpreted as “homo sapiens originated 250,000
    years ago” as it might read in a newspaper

Now, we have a new paper that adds another fossil much older than than
the previous ones, around 340000 years ago. Newspapers may claim “origin
of homo sapiens 150% older than originally thought”, or “estimates of
the origin of humans overthrown by new data”. How might it look with the
uncertainties plotted?

![blah3-2011-01-29-11-35.png][]

There are a number of lessons that can be read from this.

1.  the new data updates our “best estimate” by only a little - the old
    data, combined with the new data, are used for the estimate
2.  our uncertainties have widened - by having a larger range of data,
    our uncertainties may have increased with new data.

In reality, estimating an origin (first event) will update a bit
differently than this example shows. For example, the uncertainties in
the right-half of the distribution may not be affected at all by an
older observation. If this data were in medicine, however, and we were
estimating the effect of some new treatment, then the update would be
very similar. A single result of a strong effect may not increase our
best estimate for that effect by a huge amount. The uncertainties in
many medical treatments, or dietary recommendations, straddle the
origin: there is significant probability for *no effect*. It would be
fruitful to see the plot of uncertainties, pushed a little this way and
that, updated in perhaps a wiki style by scientists as new data come in.
There would be many lessons, all of which would help the public
understanding of science.

1.  observations rarely overturn well-supported scientific understanding
2.  not all topics have equal uncertainties - doubting everything the
    same amount is not rational
3.  certainty is never an option, but sometimes the uncertainty is so
    low that there is a practical certainty
4.  nature itself, not authority, determines our best guess and some of
    our uncertainty
5.  if the thing you are measuring has a small effect, then you should
    expect a series of measurements of the effect to change sign: bran
    is good, bran is bad, bran is good, etc.... This doesn’t mean that
    the scientists are waffling, it only means that the effect is small
    and difficult to detect - and probably meaningless.

I think the public could learn to, at least qualitatively, understand
and use plots like these. Perhaps there is a better way to display it
that does not do violence to the truth, and I’d be open to that. I think
getting in the habit of making plots like this would be good for the
scientist as well, forcing them to address and communicate the actual
uncertainties in their claims.

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
!<>

</div>

  [Beyond Belief]: http://thesciencenetwork.org/programs/beyond-belief-science-religion-reason-and-survival
  [blah2-2011-01-29-11-35.png]: http://lh3.ggpht.com/_VLTJPGH7Stw/TURPTliAviI/AAAAAAAAIa4/CfFYIxijoUw/blah2-2011-01-29-11-35.png
  [blah3-2011-01-29-11-35.png]: http://lh4.ggpht.com/_VLTJPGH7Stw/TURPUQuuLWI/AAAAAAAAIa8/Aw9Zwx60JR4/blah3-2011-01-29-11-35.png
