Title: Baseball and the Naming of the Gospels
Date: 2013-07-07 18:48
Author: brianblais
Slug: baseball-and-the-naming-of-the-gospels

So I was listening to the [Reasonable Doubts podcast][], and in either
the [episode on the nativity][] or the one on the [reasonableness of
Christianity][] (both debates), the theist in the debate said something
to the effect that, had the Gospels been forged (i.e. weren't written by
the claimed disciple Matthew, translator Mark, historian Luke, and
disciple John) then the forgers would have chosen more notable author
names, such as Peter or James, to enhance the reputation of the text.
 He then made an analogy with baseball card forgeries, and said that if
you were to make a forgery of baseball cards you'd choose someone like
Babe Ruth, and not some lesser player.

I love analogies with the rebuttal built in!  If you were forging
baseball cards, you most certainly *wouldn't* do one of Babe Ruth,
because the BS meter would peg on anyone who you showed it to.  You
would want to choose one that was valuable but not *too* valuable.
 Otherwise, it might be rejected outright.

It would follow that there is some advantage to choosing a name that has
some prestige (e.g. Matthew) but not *too* much (e.g. Peter).

This is not to mention that the names on the documents were added many
decades after they were written, the order of the Gospels was determined
with the mistaken idea that Matthew was primary, and that the so-called
eye-witness (Matthew) copies verbatim the text of a non eye-witness
(Mark).

  [Reasonable Doubts podcast]: http://freethoughtblogs.com/reasonabledoubts
  [episode on the nativity]: http://freethoughtblogs.com/reasonabledoubts/2012/12/24/rd-extra-the-nativity-debate-with-jonathan-pearce-and-randal-rauser/
  [reasonableness of Christianity]: http://freethoughtblogs.com/reasonabledoubts/2013/03/17/rd-extra-orme-vs-shieber-debate-does-the-christian-god-exist/
