Title: Christianity and morality
Date: 2013-06-10 12:50
Author: brianblais
Tags: Religion, Uncategorized
Slug: christianity-and-morality

In a comment to [one of my posts][] about miscellaneous Christian ideas,
David Marshall [asks the following question][]:

> Why do you suppose that you think slavery is wrong?  How do you know
> it isn't because you are at the end of a long process of
> Christianization of morals within western thought, that I (briefly)
> describe?

I think this is a fair question, and felt it needed some thought, so I
took a few days to ponder it.  I'm sure there is more to be said on
this, but let me outline my thinking process on this.

Where did I come by the concept of why slavery is wrong?  I'd say it
starts with the way I was brought up, where I learned to treat people
well.  From there, learning history, I could see that history is filled
with examples of people treating others badly (including owning other
people as property) and people treating others well.    Of course, this
part is cultural, and if I had been raised in the South in the 1830's,
slavery would not immediately seem obviously wrong.  As an adult, one
learns about the proper justification for beliefs.  How beliefs should
be based on evidence, and learning the methods of science, I was able to
much better evaluate the reasons behind claims, and also understand the
ways in which erroneous justifications have been made for many claims.
 This ties into psychology, economics, and a whole host of other human
activities.

After all this, I've come to accept that morality relates to the
suffering and well-being of conscious creatures.  As such, we can make
objective evaluations about how to increase well-being and decrease
suffering.  It becomes clear, then, that owning people as property
needlessly increases suffering, and as such is objectively wrong.  I can
then apply this principle in cases where I was raised with a different
moral perspective, and find that some of these are wrong.  For example,
banning gay marriage is wrong (sorry for the double negative!), even if
I was raised with the opposite.  It needlessly adds to human suffering.
 So, I can override my cultural teachings on morality, and in the same
way I am able to judge other worldviews for obvious cases of immoral
behavior (e.g. suicide bombing, genocide, etc...)

How do I know it isn't because I am at the end of a long process of
Christianization of morals within western thought?  I prefer to
rephrase, slightly, saying "why do I believe it is likely..." instead of
"how do I know...".  This is a matter of probability, and I don't think
it is possible to demonstrate the truth of a claim like this to the
level of probability that I would consider knowledge.  So why do I
believe "slavery is wrong" is *unlikely* to be simply the end of a
process of Christianization?  First and foremost, I see no clear
evidence that Christianity as revealed in the Bible has a clear message
against slavery.  You can find passages vaguely against particular
slave-master situations, and you can find dictates about how you should
treat your slaves.  There is *never* a case where it says,
<span style="text-decoration:underline;">*clearly*</span>, that slavery
is in fact wrong.  Second, there is historical precedent for Christians
to argue for slavery based on a Biblical reading - and this wasn't just
a fringe reading.  One might argue that they are using a wrong reading,
but how do we know?

Thirdly, following on this, my experience with *legitimate* searches for
truth is that they converge after some initial state of disagreement.
 Take any previously contentious argument in science that is currently
well understood - say, the origin of heat.  Over the past couple hundred
years there were many theories about what heat was - the elemental
theory of heat, a fluid theory, a statistical theory, etc...  Once the
scientific methodology was improved to the point where this problem
could be explored rationally, the ideas started to converge.  There were
fewer interpretations of the evidence considered valid, and now there
really is just one.  This is true for *every* branch of science, and I
would contend, any approach that addresses the truth - you start off
with divergent ideas when you don't fully understand a topic, and
converge to a single understanding.  I see*no evidence* of this in
Christianity.  There is *more* disagreement now than 1000 years ago
about pivotal doctrines.  This is not the pattern we see for something
that is *true*, but is a pattern for something we see a *cultural*.

Finally, I do see evidence of Christians changing their doctrines to
suit their particular ends.  Most of the Old Testament is conveniently
ignored, interpreted away, because it has become untenable in a modern
society.  Christian's don't do this because it is a natural, obvious
step in the faith but because modern, secular progress has demonstrated
that many of the doctrines are either wrong or simply useless.  The
authority of religion has been battered from all directions.

Thus, I see evidence of cherry-picking, an inconsistent message in the
Bible which allows for nearly any philosophical stance to justified with
the proper cherry-picking, and a lot of post-hoc argumentation.  I see
immoral acts not only allowed by God, but commanded by God, and thus at
best an inconsistent moral picture from the "good" book.  I've heard it
referred to as the "great book of multiple choice", and I believe that
this interpretation is more consistent with all of the aspects I've seen
about Christianity, both present and historical.

  [one of my posts]: http://brianblais.wordpress.com/2013/06/07/miscellaneous-christian-topics-another-counter-to-marshall/
  [asks the following question]: http://brianblais.wordpress.com/2013/06/07/miscellaneous-christian-topics-another-counter-to-marshall/#comment-446
