Title: Does Watson Think?
Date: 2011-02-23 11:36
Author: brianblais
Slug: does-watson-think

There has been a lot in the news about Watson. [One article on CNN][]
says “Watson doesn't really ‘think’ anything, and it struggles with
simple questions that most humans can answer without a second thought.”
They continue, “a question like ‘If a snowman melts and later refreezes,
does it turn back into a snowman?’ would be nearly impossible for a
statistical reasoning program to tackle.”

Another [article on NPR][] compares Watson to a plant. “Watson,
biologically speaking, if you get my drift, is a plant. Watson is big
and it is rooted. Like all plants, it is deaf, blind, and immobile; it
is basically incapable of directing action of any kind on the world
around it.” Continuing, “Giving a plant a camera won't make it see, and
giving it language won't let it think. Which is just a way of reminding
us that Watson understands no language. Unlike the ant, who acts as
though it has reasons for its actions, Watson acts like a plant that
talks.”

I think both authors are pretty glib at stating that Watson doesn’t
think like us. I am not entirely convinced. When Deep Blue defeated
Kasparov in chess, it was stated that Deep Blue doesn’t play chess like
a person plays chess. This is true. Deep Blue simply tries all of the
possibilities, good, bad, and stupid. Chess masters don’t even *see* bad
moves. Watson is another matter. Sure it compares the words in the
question to a big database, but it is doing probabilistic reasoning at
its core. This is exactly what people do. So Watson can’t handle very
abstract questions, like the concept of melting snowmen, but could a
child who has never experienced snow make this leap? We make this leap
because we’ve been presented, throughout our life, with a regular
universe and our brain has made an internal model of that universe.
Watson, too, has an internal model for its universe but the difference
is that Watson’s universe is sensory impoverished and conceptually
limited.

Watson certainly cannot think as well as we humans, but that is a
limitation more of its hardware and the training environment that it is
in. But in many ways, Watson thinks just like us.

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
![]

</div>

  [One article on CNN]: http://www.cnn.com/2011/TECH/innovation/02/17/watson.silverman/index.html
  [article on NPR]: http://www.npr.org/blogs/13.7/2011/02/18/133853619/ibm-s-watson-a-hard-case
  []: https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/6965073194684424505-5941281874629837664?l=bblais.blogspot.com
