Title: Economics
Date: 2010-01-31 16:36
Author: brianblais
Slug: economics

In a post about [Ten Principles of Economics][], Harvard Professor [Greg
Mankiw][] writes a little [acrostic][] device about economics. In
addition to things like "**E**verything has a cost. There is no free
lunch. There is always a trade-off." for the "E" in economics, I found
this one caught my eye: "**O**ne More. Rational people make decisions on
the basis of the cost of one more unit (of consumption, of investment,
of labor hour, etc.)."

My first thought was, is this really true? Perhaps a real economist will
correct me, but I disagree with this statement. From my limited
economics knowledge, a rational person makes a decision to maximize the
net benefit resulting from that decision, given the information that the
person has. This is maximizing the benefits minus the costs, or

<div style="text-align:center;">
![0F362209-06FA-46F3-9B58-0EE7A9BD0F98.jpg][]

</div>

Where *B(q)* is the benefit and *C(q)* is the cost, and *q* is a label
for the different possible decisions, usually representing the quantity
of a particular good that is purchased. To find the maximum (or minimum)
we take the derivative and set it to zero:

<div style="text-align:center;">
![962BDC01-F9A1-4FF8-A7FD-694A1D810921.jpg][]

</div>

The decision on the "basis of the cost of one more unit" is referring to
*dC(q)/dq*, or the marginal cost. When the marginal cost equals the
marginal benefit, then we are at an optimum (which could be a minimum of
the net benefit!).

What I disagree with is that I don't think that people make a decision
based on *dC(q)/dq*, but rather that they make decisions on *B(q)-C(q)*.
You might say, "But, hey, those are the same thing!". The distinction I
think is found in the correspondence between a model and the real-world.
Quantities like the cost of a good, or the benefit of the good, are
directly observable and measurable. The marginals, or derivatives, of
those same quantities are not directly observable but are inferred from
the values of the non-marginal quantities at various values of *q*.

To make an analogy with physics, think of position and speed. Speed is
change of position with time, or the "marginal position" if you will.
You measure speed by taking different positions and different times of
some object, and calculating speed. You don't measure speed directly.
The analogy breaks a bit, because there are ways of inferring speed
without position, using the [doppler effect][], which is how we can
[measure the speeds of very distant objects][] without knowing their
position.

The question I have is, "Is there a similar way to directly measure the
marginal cost, without first knowing the cost of the good?" I don't
think that this is possible. First, I think it quite likely that there
are cases where *B(q)-C(q)* is not differentiable, so it makes no sense
to think of "just one more" but you can still maximize the quantity. The
differentiation is a simplification, a model. Second, the equality of
*dC(q)/dq* to *dB(q)/dq* occurs at both a minimum and a maximum, and
needs to be confirmed if it is truly a maximum by going back to the
values of *B(q)* and *C(q)*. Thus knowledge of "one more" is incomplete.
Finally, as stated above, I don't think that the marginals are directly
observable, whereas the direct quantities are.

Hopefully an economist will comment and correct, or confirm, what I am
saying!

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
![]

</div>

  [Ten Principles of Economics]: http://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2010/01/economics.html
  [Greg Mankiw]: http://www.blogger.com/profile/18161221774770492266
  [acrostic]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acrostic
  [0F362209-06FA-46F3-9B58-0EE7A9BD0F98.jpg]: http://lh6.ggpht.com/_VLTJPGH7Stw/S2Wrt2hthgI/AAAAAAAAGHQ/DsQ8Uv1G_-k/0F362209-06FA-46F3-9B58-0EE7A9BD0F98.jpg?imgmax=800
  [962BDC01-F9A1-4FF8-A7FD-694A1D810921.jpg]: http://lh3.ggpht.com/_VLTJPGH7Stw/S2WsfHf1wsI/AAAAAAAAGHU/s-bsEAe1sHc/962BDC01-F9A1-4FF8-A7FD-694A1D810921.jpg?imgmax=800
  [doppler effect]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doppler_effect
  [measure the speeds of very distant objects]: http://astro.wku.edu/astr106/Hubble_intro.html
  []: https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/6965073194684424505-6340564199039180353?l=bblais.blogspot.com
