Title: "Frivolous" research in science
Date: 2011-05-28 11:43
Author: brianblais
Slug: frivolous-research-in-science

My blog has been languishing for a bit, so I hope to bring it back and
be a bit more active.

Someone recently made a comment that they thought that there was a lot
of “frivolous” research in science. They said “I don't really care how
big the universe is. I am not happier because of that knowledge. My life
is no better, nor my parents or my future children.[...] For me, in the
end I don't see how it benefits humanity. I would much rather see that
time and intellect spent on pursuing ways to improve global living
standards, protect the environment, create a better education system,
etc...”

My response:

There are several things I could say about this. People are notoriously
horrible at predicting which lines of intellectual pursuits will yield
real practical results (i.e. direct benefits to humanity). For example,
in the late 1800's there was some work done on some pretty obscure
mathematical concepts in wave mechanics. At the time there were very few
practical results foreseen from this work, if any. However, it later
became the foundation for telecommunications, which arguably makes up
the bulk of the global economy today. There are many examples like this.
That's why it's always good to have basic research funded well, even if
it seems frivolous at the time.

Knowledge matters, no matter what it is. Your example about how you
don't care how big the universe is, for instance. Let's look at a couple
of contrasting beliefs, and their consequences to things like protecting
the environment, something you state is important. Person A believes
that the world was created specifically for humans, 6000 years ago, and
that this creator is making sure things are going along well for his
followers (i.e. granting miracles, giving guidance, etc...) Person B
believes that the Jesus is going to come again in this lifetime, and the
world will end in glory. Person C knows how big the universe really is.
This means that person C realizes that 1) the Earth is a relatively
small place and 2) there isn't anywhere else we can go if things get
messed up here. Which person do you think would be most willing to make
difficult decisions to protect the environment for the next, say,
200-300 years?

There are benefits to "frivolous" science. One benefit is in critical
thinking, no matter what the topic. Another benefit is the philosophical
placement of humans in the grander scheme of things. This can have
direct \*practical\* effects on humanity, and its future. On any topic,
truth beats untruth.

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
!<>

</div>

