Title: Knowledge and Belief
Date: 2011-07-27 09:52
Author: brianblais
Slug: knowledge-and-belief

I was just directed to [this announcement][] concerning an NSF survey on
science literacy. The bottom line is that the NSF is deciding to change
the wording of two questions in the survey. The original wording is
“Human beings, as we know them today, developed from earlier species of
animals,” and “The universe began with a huge explosion.” . The new
wording is “*According to evolutionary theory,* human beings, as we know
them today, developed from earlier species of animals” and “*According
to astronomers,* the universe began with a huge explosion.” (emphasis
mine). It is noted that there will be a transition period with the
questions, with half of the surveys containing the new questions and
half the old, to determine its effect.

The stated goal for this change, from the NSF, is to separate knowledge
from belief. You might *believe* that humans are created in their
present form, 6000 years ago, but the new questions try to ascertain
whether you know that “evolutionary theory” says something different. Is
this an important distinction? Is this what we really want to measure?
Which is more important for a society? What is the difference between
knowledge and belief?

It is quite clear that there will be at least one effect for this
rewording: given that the US falls way behind other countries on science
literacy, especially with these particular questions, the rewording will
most likely increase these numbers with no other work done.

<span style="font-size:15pt;">**Definitions and Concepts**</span>

Beliefs are representations of the world. Specifically, they are
representations that we hold to be correct for the real world...as
opposed to hopes, which are also representations of the world by not
ones that we hold to be necessarily correct. Along with beliefs we
always have a confidence in the belief, specified as a probability
(either explicitly or implicitly). Knowledge is simply that collection
of beliefs that we hold with such high probability or, in other words,
with such confidence that we do not significantly doubt them. The belief
that the sun rises in the east each morning is considered knowledge for
the reason that we hold it with an extremely high probability. This is
not just as a result of an inductive reasoning process (i.e. it always
has, in our experience, risen in the east each morning) but because it
is part of a larger body of knowledge (i.e. astrophysics) for which it
is just one consequence within a whole host of other well-established
predictions.

Now, on to scientific literacy. The NSF defines scientific literacy as
[“knowing basic facts and concepts about science and having an
understanding of how science works.”][] Why is it important? Again, [the
NSF][“knowing basic facts and concepts about science and having an
understanding of how science works.”]: “It is valuable not only in
keeping up with important science-related issues, but also in evaluating
and assessing the validity of any type of information and participating
meaningfully in the political process.” The question we must ask is,
does the new wording measure scientific literacy better than the old
wording? To do this, we need to outline the four possible types of
people answering the two forms of the questions:

1.  people who answer “yes” to the old and “yes” to the new
2.  people who answer “no” to the old and “no” to the new
3.  people who answer “no” to the old and “yes” to the new
4.  people who answer “yes” to the old and “no” to the new

The wording change doesn’t change cases 1 and 2, adds case 3 to the
“yes” category and it introduces the erroneous case 4. The cases can be
summarized in another way, like

1.  people who know both that, say, the universe began with a big
    explosion and that astronomers claim that this is true. This is
    indicative of scientific literacy.
2.  people who don’t know, or do not believe, that the universe began
    with a big explosion and that don’t know that astronomers claim that
    this is true. This is indicative of scientific *illiteracy*.
3.  people who don’t *believe* that the universe began with a big
    explosion but know that astronomers claim that this is true. (more
    on this below)
4.  people who know that the universe began with a big explosion, but do
    not believe that astronomers claim that this is true. This might at
    first seem to be a totally unreasonable and marginal case, but I
    think it is more significant than perhaps is generally appreciated.
    These people might think that the new wording is a trick question
    (e.g. they might think that *physicists*, as opposed to astronomers,
    claim that it is true). I’ve had students answer questions in this
    way, so it is not quite as uncommon as one might think. These
    students overthink the problem: they know the fact, but are
    distracted by the extra complexity of the question, thinking that
    the test is trying to trick them.

<span style="font-size:15pt;">**Case 3: The Religious Believer**</span>

The only reason these particular questions were modified was because of
the prevalence of religious belief. How do we know this? We don’t see a
proposal to change “The Earth orbits around the Sun and takes a year to
do it” to “According to astronomers, the Earth orbits around the Sun and
takes a year to do it.” Why? Because no religion (now) has a stake in
the answer to that question, and thus have no objection to the claim. Of
course, if you go back to the days of Copernicus this was a different
story and people were severely punished for too strongly making such a
claim. The two questions that are proposed to be changed in this way are
precisely the two concepts that crop up in every creationist tract, and
are clearly the two major stumbling blocks for a literalist reading of
the Bible or the Quran.

Aside from the motivation for the change, we can ask the question
whether it is accomplishing something important anyway. Are these Case 3
people, who would answer “no” to the old question but “yes” to the new
question, demonstrating scientific literacy? I don’t think so. What
they’ve confirmed is that they know that some scientists *claim* that
the universe began with an explosion, but they don’t believe it. This
means that they don’t accept the data, or the methods, or both. If the
question were about something on the fringes of science, then perhaps
this is fine, but it isn’t the case with these two questions. Evolution
theory, for example, is as well established as the Round Earth theory
and the Germ theory of disease. To deny it is to deny all of the
*independent* work in molecular biology, embryology, ecology, etc...
which support it. Even though they may know that fact that biologists
support Evolution theory, they have not demonstrated any scientific
literacy in terms of “evaluating and assessing the validity of any type
of information and participating meaningfully in the political process.”
The same can be said of the Big Bang theory, to a slightly lesser degree
(i.e. there isn’t *quite* the volume of completely independent *fields*
of study supporting it, as there is for Evolution, but the data is
nearly incontrovertible anyway). To deny either idea is akin to denying
the Germ theory of disease.

<span style="font-size:15pt;">**Bottom line**</span>

Imagine someone answering “no” to the question “The world is round” but
answers “yes” to “According to geographers, the world is round”. Would
they be demonstrating scientific literacy? I don’t think so. Do we want
to pander to the religious-motivated ignorance in this country, for the
sake of increasing the *appearance* of scientific literacy? I don’t
think so.

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
![]

</div>

  [this announcement]: http://blogs.bryant.edu/newsroom/?p=894
  [“knowing basic facts and concepts about science and having an
  understanding of how science works.”]: http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind04/c7/c7s2.htm
  []: https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/6965073194684424505-6166489707810895333?l=bblais.blogspot.com
