Title: Logical vs Reasonable
Date: 2012-12-07 13:54
Author: brianblais
Slug: logical-vs-reasonable

I was listening to an episode of the [Rationally Speaking][] podcast,
which overall is quite good, but from time to time I disagree.  In this
case they were talking about the technical use of terms versus the
colloquial use.  We see that in physics a lot, with terms like energy,
force, and heat, and one has to be very careful when using these terms.
 In the podcast, they used the example of people using the word
"logical", as in "that is the logical thing to do".  The host thought
this should really mean "that is the *reasonable* thing to do", given
that they aren't generally doing a deductive proof to make the decision.
 The tone he used was that this should be obvious...however it is
not...it is wrong.  Why should the word "logical" be restricted to
*deductive* logic?  Why should it not include inductive logic?  Pretty
much that pulls in all of [probability theory][], and it then becomes
(nearly) synonymous with "reasonable".

When I say the two phrases in my head, I do sense a subtle differerence,
with "logical" being more definititive than "reasonable".  Perhaps it is
more of a difference like "probable" and "plausible" - still not a
deductive distinction, but a distinction of magnitude in inductive
reasoning.  

Still, it is an interesting thing to think about how we use language in
science and society.

  [Rationally Speaking]: http://rationallyspeaking.blogspot.com/
  [probability theory]: http://bayes.wustl.edu/etj/prob/book.pdf
