Title: MOOCs and Treadmills
Date: 2013-09-25 18:08
Author: brianblais
Slug: moocs-and-treadmills

MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) are a hot topic in education, and no
one seems to know quite how it will play out.  After sitting in on
several of these, I've come to find (at least for me) that they are the
treadmill of education.

I try to keep up a running schedule, which I've been able to do during
the spring and summer, but have always fallen off the wagon in the
winter.  In the winter, the dark and the cold makes it hard to run
outside and the academic schedule makes it hard to run during the
daylight hours.  I hope to overcome this, but it means running more on
my treadmill (which I have).  The difference between running outside and
running on a treadmill is psychological - if you run a mile and don't
feel up to the second mile you can get off the treadmill and go back
upstairs for a break.  The same thing happens with a MOOC.

I've "attended" a few of these classes, but never really finished.  This
is due to time and motivation, because the classes generally were pretty
good.  However, given pressing time of things that I *have* to do, it is
hard to push my way through assignments that I might *like* to do.  In
addition, I find it hard to find time to sit and watch a video, instead
of reading or listening to audio books, seminars and podcasts which are
all more convenient (at least for me).

Perhaps this is my particular failing, but I wonder how common this
perspective is.
