Title: Mystery, Knowledge, Science and Television
Date: 2011-08-03 12:44
Author: brianblais
Slug: mystery-knowledge-science-and-television

J J Abrams, the creator of the television show “Lost”, gives a [Ted
talk][] where he suggests that sometimes mystery is more important than
knowledge. His “mystery box” represents infinite possibilities and hope
and that mystery is the catalyst for imagination. He sees the “Lost”
television show as a mystery box, always with the sense of possibility.

Now, to be fair, I have not actually seen Lost, so perhaps my comments
are unwarranted, but I decided not to watch Lost for the following
reason. When Lost was first beginning, several friends said that I would
like it. I told them that I would watch it if, and only if, at the end
of the series they could tell me that the “plan” for the series actually
existed. It was claimed that the series was planned from start to
finish, but my friends told me afterward that it was clear it wasn’t,
after watching the finale. Too many loose ends, too many mysteries.

I think that J J Abrams learned the wrong lesson about mystery, as
represented by his television show “Lost”. It’s not just the mystery,
for the sake of mystery, it is the solving of the mystery that yields
more mysteries. Scientists are comfortable with not knowing...we are
constantly at the edge of what is known and not known. However, what
motivates the scientist isn’t the mystery, it is the solution to the
mystery knowing that will open up more. There is nothing more
dissatisfying than a book, movie, or television show that just opens up
more and more “mysteries” and never resolves them...it seems artificial
and disorganized. Most people assume that the mysteries will be solved
by the end, so they allow themselves to be taken in by the mysteries.
However, once it becomes clear that the mysteries are not going to be
solved, most lose their attention and become disenchanted.

What made Babylon 5 so engaging was that there was a plan, and you could
count on it. You knew that if there was a mystery, that you’d see the
resolution of it. I’ll admit that the resolution of the main conflict
(the Shadow War) was a bit disappointing, once it happened, but I think
part of that feeling had to do with pace and not with the resolution
itself. Mystery for the sake of mystery is enough to motivate,
temporarily, but not forever. In the real world, solving mysteries opens
up more...that’s the real motivator!

<div class="blogger-post-footer">
![]

</div>

  [Ted talk]: http://www.ted.com/talks/lang/eng/j_j_abrams_mystery_box.html
  []: https://blogger.googleusercontent.com/tracker/6965073194684424505-1364558347802399935?l=bblais.blogspot.com
