Title: Offended by prayer on a mural
Date: 2011-11-07 15:46
Author: brianblais
Slug: offended-by-prayer-on-a-mural

In Cranston, RI there is a lawsuit about a [mural depicting a
school-sanctioned prayer][]. The image of the mural is here:

![Mural of School Prayer][]

The student was offended by having this prayer here, and some Christians
I have spoken to say it's not a big deal, it's a historical object, it's
message is a nice academic one, etc... Further, they claim that a
student being offended by it isn't enough reason to remove it. Some
students are offended by evolution in biology class, and we don't remove
that, for example. However, the [Establishment Clause][] of the
[Constitution][] clearly states "Congress shall make no law respecting
an establishment of religion". Christians will point to this mural and
state that it is generically religious, and thus is not the
establishment of any particular religion.

When I first read this mural, I was immediately offended by it, as a
message in a public institution educating children. It establishes a
clear bias towards the Abrahamic faiths (Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam) by referring to "Heavenly Father". Buddhism doesn't have this,
neither does Hinduism, or Paganism, or etc.... not to mention atheists.
The message itself is actually very nice, so why not do the easiest
thing: Block out, in as unobtrusive way possible, the "Heavenly father"
and the "Amen", and simply call it the School Doctrine, or School
Message, or some other innocuous phrase. Even calling it a prayer is not
so bad in my book, as long as there isn't a clear bias towards a
particular religion. I wonder if the student tried to do that. It would
seem to be a straightforward solution, that a school system might
consider, in order to keep itself out of a lawsuit on the issue.

  [mural depicting a school-sanctioned prayer]: http://www.foxnews.com/us/2011/10/13/rhode-island-atheist-student-school-clash-over-prayer-mural-lawsuit/
  [Mural of School Prayer]: http://a57.foxnews.com/static/managed/img/U.S./396/223/School%20Prayer%20Banner_Kade.jpg
  [Establishment Clause]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Establishment_Clause
  [Constitution]: http://www.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/constitution.html
