Title: On Being Wrong
Date: 2012-03-20 00:38
Author: brianblais
Slug: on-being-wrong

I tell my students that I supremely hope that they have the experience
of one of their cherished ideas shown to be wrong. I was recently
confronted with a perception mistake on my part which I found to be
pretty interesting, even if the consequences are pretty mundane. So, I'm
learning how to swim, and I take lessons at the local YMCA. I have
recently started practicing a little at the university pool. When I
first started swimming at the university pool I noticed that it was
significantly longer than the one at the YMCAâ€¦at least that is what I
thought. I had told a number of people this, particularly how much
longer it looked and how much longer it felt swimming to the other side.

I was told this past weekend that they are the same length, which I
totally didn't believe. The swim instructor insisted that they are both
25 yards long, and that she has swim meets in both pools. Still
skeptical, I did some digging. The university pool seemed, to me, to be
1.5 to 2 times longer! No way I could make a mistake of that magnitude!
It felt much longer! It took longer to swim across!

\*sigh\*

They are the same length.

What I find very interesting is how certain I was of a completely
physical measurement, that later turned out to be incorrect. There is
something about how the pool had very few people at the university or
had glass on each end, compared to the crowded YMCA pool which is walled
in by cinderblock, combined with my inexperience with swimming which
probably gives rise to the illusion. Or perhaps the fact that the YMCA
pool is narrower adds to the illusion. Whatever it is, it was a
completely obvious, visceral estimate of the length of an object that
turned out to be completely wrong.

It reminds me of the sort of arguments that people make like "Air Force
pilots will not make mistakes in observing things in the sky, which
bolsters the UFO claim" or "Doctors will not make mistakes in observing
medical effects, which bolsters this miracle claim." Arguments from
authority fail because authorities can be mistaken, even on basic
things.
