Title: Presuppositions and Science
Date: 2013-08-30 10:22
Author: brianblais
Slug: presuppositions-and-science

I heard on a podcast a theist say that he had a problem with [Victor
Stenger][].  The critique was phrased something like, that Dr Stenger
put his atheism first in his explanations, that he has a presupposition
against against using God as an explanation, a presupposition against
the supernatural.  Something struck me as odd about this perspective,
and then I realized that one never hears this sort of perspective in
scientific circles.

Why not?  I think it's because, in science, it is recognized that the
natural world will correct any wrong presupposition...the truth will
out.  So, if someone has a presupposition, just let it ride out and see
if it works.  Einstein had a presupposition for a static universe - he
even "corrected " his theory to get rid of the dynamics when it was
pointed out to him that that was a consequence.  Once the data came in
that was best explained with a dynamics universe, he modified the theory
and said it was a big mistake.

Another example comes from my own experience teaching astronomy.  For
years I taught the prevailing wisdom that there were two possibilities
for the end of the universe.  Either the expanding universe, initiated
at the Big Bang, would have enough mass to collapse again in a Big
Crunch or it would expand forever, slowing but never stopping.  It was
never on the radar that it could be accelerating, and had anyone
suggested it, I would have said it was unreasonable.  Of course the
universe doesn't care about my bias, lack of imagination, or
presupposition and it [does appear to be accelerating][] nonetheless.

So, if someone has a presupposition against God as an explanation,
indulge them!  If they are wrong, then at some point it will make a bad
prediction and fail.  If not, then we've learned that, for the thing
explained, [the concept of God is not necessary][].  Don't complain
about the presupposition.  Know that the truth will out, eventually.  On
the other hand, I would love to know what predictions the God theory
makes (not post-dictions), so that it can be tested.

  [Victor Stenger]: https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FVictor_J._Stenger&ei=vWsgUrXsCPPcsATY-4DgCw&usg=AFQjCNG95MPQQo8A3iTYqIOUgau5LOm1PQ&sig2=aw2RrmUxSqP65wajuDiDGw&bvm=bv.51495398,d.cWc
  [does appear to be accelerating]: https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FAccelerating_universe&ei=qHEgUoeAKImvsATtn4HYBg&usg=AFQjCNF_e7fQaSVCpDu_fd5kPvbv3rMjPg&sig2=ChrwqKtGXRTokLqdzr_OYQ&bvm=bv.51495398,d.cWc
  [the concept of God is not necessary]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre-Simon_Laplace#I_had_no_need_of_that_hypothesis
