Title: Santa and other delusions
Date: 2012-01-04 10:58
Author: brianblais
Slug: santa-and-other-delusions

Given how I seem to support no delusions, how can I justify perpetuating
the myth of Santa Claus with my kids (oldest nearing 10)? First, I have
to say I am not entirely convinced it is a good idea. I'd be open to
evidence (not just opinion!) of the harm, but I haven't actually seen
any. Further, there seems to be a need for fantasy play with children
below a certain age (somewhere around 10). I am not sure of the
developmental role, but the behavior (even without adult help) is
ubiquitous. Finally, it is fun and interesting. Here's a little sample
story that happened this year, that made me understand that I have no
idea how kids are actually perceiving the world.

We had gotten an [Elf-on-the-Shelf][] this year for the first time. Our
kids had seen them before, at school and at friends houses, so they were
familiar with the rules: no touching the elf (or he loses his powers);
the elf can't touch the ground at all; you can talk to him all you want
(but he won't talk back to you); he goes off each night, and returns in
a new place in the house where you need to find him. Now, one morning we
hadn't secured our little elf too well...he was sitting on a stuffed
Santa, hanging on a door. At one point the kids started shouting because
the Elf was leaning way over about to fall. After a little bit of
concern, all the kids had something in another room to do, and I managed
to adjust him back up, secure him, and go into another room myself. When
they returned, they were all abuzz with how he had leaned down all by
himself, and gotten up all by himself, etc... I suggested perhaps the
Santa had helped him up. Very seriously, they looked at me and said
"Dad, that's just a stuffed Santa".

Now I realize that people see agency in non-living things, but it was
amazing to see the same done on such a selective basis. Now sure what it
means, except that I have no idea how they perceive the world.

  [Elf-on-the-Shelf]: http://www.elfontheshelf.com/AboutUs/TheTradition.aspx
