Title: Science as Entertainment
Date: 2013-11-12 13:30
Author: brianblais
Slug: science-as-entertainment

This past weekend I was at a Girl Scouts "Mad Science" program, not as
an instructor but as a parent.  There was a lot of interesting things
presented, and the girls all seemed to have a good time, but I
constantly felt that there was little real science being done.  I've had
that feeling with some "science" shows on television, and this was
another example of what I think of as "Science as Entertainment": lots
of cool-wow eye candy, but little content.  Now, I recognize there are
some real constraints in doing programs like this, and I don't want to
be negative, so I've been thinking of ways to improve a program like
this.  Some of the constraints are:

1.  you don't often have scientists running the individual activities,
    even if you might have a scientist organize it
2.  the people running the activities are either older girl scouts or
    parents who are scout leaders - thus, there needs to be a bit of a
    script to follow
3.  you need to have the eye-candy to keep some interest
4.  you have limited time

Given these constraints, I'd offer this major suggestion:  the
activities should start with a small cool-wow demo, followed by a
question like "I wonder how this works?" or "I wonder what this is
sensitive to?".  Then do a followup activity (or more) where one
addresses these questions, always focussing on the "how do we know what
we know?" overarching theme.
 <span style="text-decoration:underline;">That's what science is really
about!</span>

Let me give some specific examples, taken from the activities actually
done.

### Static Electricity Demo

In this activity, the scouts did a number of observations of static,
including rubbing balloons in the hair and picking up pepper, attracting
ping-pong balls, and sticking the balloon to the wall.  Although all
cool, it would be good to start with one, and ask "what's going on
here?"  The example which was missing here is the *repulsion* from the
charge, giving the impression that static is always attractive.  All it
would take is to put two balloons together (or try!) and see that they
don't *like* each other...this leads to the two-charge model.  One could
even add/replace one of the activities with the [scotch-tape
version][] of the experiment, and then ask if the charge on the balloon
is the same/different than the scotch tape.

### Making Bubbles

So, the scouts made a bubble mixture from household ingredients (i.e.
dish soap, corn syrup, etc...), took them outside and played with
bubbles for a while.  A good question would be "which ingredient gives
which property?"  With all the scouts there, throughout the morning, one
could do a *lot* of trial and error, even make it a contest for the
biggest bubble, the longest lasting bubble, etc...  Does dish soap work
alone?  Does corn syrup work alone?  Why do both work?  One could tie
this to a TV show like [America's Test Kitchen][], where they do tests
like this all the time.

### Balance

Here, there was a series of gravity-type experiments with free-fall, but
then at the end they did an activity about balance: leaning against a
wall with your right shoulder and head, and trying to lift your left
leg.  Again, the sorts of questions that one could follow with is "why
is it hard to lift your leg?", "under what conditions would this be
true?", "could you come up with another pose that does something
similar?", etc...  Personally, this would be a awesome place to do the
[energy bracelet demo][]!

Conclusions
-----------

In each case, the point is to do a demo, ask some leading questions
related to "how do we know what we know", and structure the activities
to answer the questions.  I would also add that the person overseeing
the activities should be encouraged to say "I don't know", and to know
that it is a perfectly fine answer.  It should be followed up by a, "I
wonder how we could figure out" statement.

The danger in presenting science and anything that looks/sounds sciency
without any content is is primes kids to accept the latest
pseudoscience, just because it sounds technical.  It also makes kids
start thinking that science is just about the technicalities, and not
about the general questions relating to knowledge and belief.

Another danger is that several times I heard an "explanation" of what
was going on in the activity that did not really match what was actually
observed.  I know this is from following a script, but it is very
damaging. It gives kids the impression that one should believe in
science authorities, even in the face of contrary evidence.  It also
increases confusion about what is actually happening.  Cases like this
should bring up the idea of repeatability, variability, and careful
measurements.  A response like this would be more appropriate:
"hmmm...that's odd, I don't know why it isn't working like I think it
should...how can we figure this out?" Even if there is no time, or
equipment, to do the proper job it is still useful to outline how
one *could* do it.

  [scotch-tape version]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_electricity#Charged_adhesive_tape
  [America's Test Kitchen]: http://www.americastestkitchen.com/
  [energy bracelet demo]: http://youtu.be/Piu75P8sxTo?t=2m30s
