Title: Suppression of Ideas in Science
Date: 2012-05-14 09:42
Author: brianblais
Slug: suppression-of-ideas-in-science

[Video About Cold Fusion][]

This is very typical of "science" that doesn't work. You get a group of
devout people supporting it who claim that the scientific establishment
is unfair, is shunning their research, is not allowing them to present
at conferences, is suppressing their ideas and they want a level playing
field. I've seen the same whining and crying from people supporting
Intelligent Design and people supporting UFOs and people supporting
psychics. It is true, that the scientific establishment will not publish
papers for these people, given the (lack of) evidence they show. It is
biased against ideas with little supporting evidence. It is, however,
not *unfairly* biased, and least not typically. Scientists are humans,
and so you do get the occasional overzealous skepticism. That's actually
not a bad thing. As Carl Sagan said, extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence. It is incumbent on these people to support their
claims with the proper amount of evidence.

If, for example, it was absolutely clear that cold fusion worked then it
would be trivial to convert even the most hardened skeptic. If one had
convincing evidence for psychic phenomena or ufos or intelligent design,
it would become mainstream science and be very easy to convince people.
The problem is that these topics are on the fringe, their claims
extraordinary, are physical implausible, and the evidence for their
existence is terrible.

When you hear about ideas suppressed by the scientific you should
immediately think "unlikely, unsupported claim", despite what the
claimants are saying. If the evidence is strong enough, it will convince
the skeptics. Both quantum mechanics and relativity are totally weird,
and those went from nothing to the dominant idea within a decade because
of the strength of the evidence.

  [Video About Cold Fusion]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htgV7fNO-2k&feature=related
