Title: Textual Transmission Bottlenecks
Date: 2013-08-20 14:58
Author: brianblais
Slug: textual-transmission-bottlenecks

So I've been thinking about the origins of Christianity and the texts
that we have which concern it.  Then I watched Richard Carrier's new
presentation on [why he thinks Jesus didn't exist][], and I started
thinking about this again.  The question I have, particularly for
Christians, is

> What sort of effect, and what *magnitude* of an effect, do you believe
> the process of textual transmission from 0CE to 1000CE had on what we
> can look at today concerning the origin of Christianity?

This includes the number, quality, and contents of the ancient texts
around the time of Jesus, for example.  I think there are a number of
uncontroversial claims we can make about this question.

1.  The Christian church had a near monopoly on the textual transmission
    for over 1000 years, so any and all texts went through this
    bottleneck of transmission.
2.  Texts were written in other people's name (e.g. 1 Peter, Letter to
    Timothy, etc...), whether well-meaning or not.
3.  Texts were modified during this period, either deliberately or not.
4.  Not all texts were preserved.

This fourth point is key, because it plays into what we have to look at
now.  First, only texts deemed important would generally be copied.  So
we would expect to have more texts of the canonical view, whatever that
happened to be.  Secondly, alternative theologies, different
perspectives, hostile and critical treatments would not make the cut.
 This isn't deliberate censorship, it is simply a product of the limited
attentional energies of scribes.  Thus, these texts would be exceedingly
rare or non-existent, thus giving a very different picture of the real
situation at the time.  Thirdly, contrary views could possibly be
deliberately destroyed, and we have evidence of that happening sometimes
as well.

Now, apologists will often make the claim that the Biblical texts that
we do have are very near the originals, or we can reconstruct a near
original from the comparison with the many copies we have.  They often
point out that we have many more copies (and earlier copies) of Biblical
texts than, say, of Plato's texts.  Fair enough.  But this is what we
would expect from the points above, and so it is not surprising.

I have two thoughts on this.  Firstly what I always wonder is how much
of what we have is really a collection of the "winner's" texts.  If
there were (as we know to be the case) many different views of Jesus
around the time, many with conflicting perspectives, would much of them
survive the points above?  This is easily verified by the Dead Sea
Scrolls, where texts were hidden from the deliberate process of the
early church purging the conflicting theological texts.  If the Library
of Alexandria hadn't been burned, would we have the same view of
Christianity as we have now?  It's like, if the Discovery Institute were
the only publisher of science textbooks for 100 years, would we even
know science?  At least in the case of science, there is the natural
world to consult to confirm, but no such confirmation comes from
historical texts.   Of course what we don't have we can't really use in
an argument, but it does make one wonder, and should make one highly
suspect of any text that has survived the points above.

Secondly, and this is the part that really gets me, is the fact that
there is not a single mention in the first century of Jesus as a person,
except for the Gospels and less than a handful of known other sources
which are either Christian forgeries (i.e. the interpolations in
Josephus) or contested texts (i.e. Tacitus).  Here, one might cry
"argument from silence fallacy", but the key difference is the process
described above.  Given what we know about the process of textual
transmission for 1000 years, we would expect any significant, outside
reference to Jesus to be enthusiastically copied and distributed, and
yet we still have such a paucity of data?  We have complaints from early
church fathers, such as Origen and Justin Martyr, concerning the lack of
early reference to Jesus in, say, Josephus so we know it mattered to
them.  So much so that someone felt that Josephus needed to be modified
to include a reference!  This point, for me, is what undermines my
confidence in the existence of Jesus.

I would say that for me, personally, I am agnostic on it.  I am not
convinced that he existed at all - I don't find any of the arguments
compelling - however, I wouldn't bet strongly that he *didn't* exist.
 Still an interesting question, though.

  [why he thinks Jesus didn't exist]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DbTbEvFSSF8
