Title: What's wrong with this?
Date: 2011-12-06 14:03
Author: brianblais
Slug: whats-wrong-with-this

So I was asked recently "what was wrong with someone who, because of
their religious convictions, chooses not to participate in scientific
research (the example used was nuclear bomb research) because of the
harm it would give?". When they asked it, it was clear that they thought
it was a significant argument for the benefits of religion. At the time,
I didn't have the time to go into a lengthy response, so I wanted to put
it here.

If someone, out of a genuine concern for the suffering of other
individuals, chooses to forgo research which they felt would lead to the
needless suffering of those individuals, then I would support it. I
could possibly criticize their assessment of the harm (i.e. would this
research definitely cause harm, or at least, more harm than good? what
is the cost of **not** pursuing the research? etc...) This is a
perfectly **secular** rationale for the ethical decision, and we could
have a discussion, but as long as their motivation was for the genuine
well-being of humans (or even animals), then I don't have a problem.

However, if you make the **same decision** because you felt that the
creator of the universe wants you to do it, or you will be punished by
the creator if you don't do it, or you will be rewarded by the creator
for doing it then I do not support it...it may be the right decision but
for the wrong reasons. The problem with making the right decision for
the wrong reasons is that you would, next week, make wrong decisions for
the same reasons. If you're not held to a legitimate ethical argument,
grounded in the well-being of individuals and societies, then you can
justify blocking stem cell research and gay marriage for the same
"reasons" that you use to direct your own "moral" choices. Further, if
you are allowed to simply say "my religion tells me this is true", then
that ends all discussion.

Too many people assume that just because it comes from someone's
religion then is it correct, or moral, or ethical...it doesn't. We
establish the evidence supporting arguments for moral actions through
discussion, critical thinking, and the application of reason...towards
the betterment of the conditions for all conscious creatures. When faith
stands in for a reasoned ethical argument, then the result will at some
point lead to seriously unethical decisions.
