Title: What to do when you're not an expert
Date: 2013-09-19 10:47
Author: brianblais
Slug: what-to-do-when-youre-not-an-expert

So I was listening to the very interesting discussion between William
Lane Craig and Lawrence Krauss at the [City Bible Forum][], which I'll
discuss another time.  There was a good question at the end where the
moderator asked - what is a layperson to do, when they may not have the
resources, knowledge, or time to be able to properly evaluate the
position of the "experts".  Craig's response, which was reasonable by
incomplete, was to read the book *reviews* after reading a book by an
expert, to see what the responses are.  Krauss retorted that that was
another appeal to authority, and added that when you read something, "if
it seems crazy, it probably is".  Krauss' response is ridiculous, and is
especially bad given the field he is in - who *doesn't* think anything
in modern science sounds crazy?

So, what do I do?  Mine is closer to Craig's, but I take it a step
further.  When I hear a claim, I try to find someone claiming the polar
opposite.  I then read each of their supporting arguments, and the
refutations of the other sides.  I look, then, for a specific claim that
each side disagrees with, but can be easily checked - and I try to check
it.  This usually involves going back and forth between the two sides a
bit, because of the qualifications to the arguments.  Someone claims
that the Bible condones slavery, another doesn't.  I hear the quotes
from each side, and the context, and then I go to the text to look at a
couple of the passages - the ones I think are most critical.  I may then
go back to the arguments, to see if what they are saying matches what I
read, etc...

I also look at the style of the arguments.  One of the reasons I switch
from being a global warming alarmist to a luke-warmist was because of
climateaudit.org.  I could tell that they made a big deal about putting
the data up, and turn-key scripts to do the analysis, so it was
completely straightforward to check every step.  I didn't need to check
every step myself, but the effort to make things transparent was quite
evident.  If I see people dodging the meat of a challenge, or not being
transparent, or engaging in special pleading, I need not have to
evaluate the argument in quite so much detail to be reasonably convinced
that there is a problem with it.

I think the habit of examining the opposing view, even - and especially
- when you agree with the original view is extremely important, and
something that many do not do.  They follow blogs that agree with them
only, read newspapers that agree with their point of view, listen to
podcasts that agree with them, etc...  That's one of the reasons I
really like the [Unbelievable podcast][].

 

 

  [City Bible Forum]: http://www.youtube.com/channel/UCt1YTYKDW8f5s5q9McoHJ_Q
  [Unbelievable podcast]: http://www.premierradio.org.uk/shows/saturday/unbelievable.aspx
