Title: Unbelievable Project: A "proxy" atheist explains why he can't believe
Date: 2013-03-15 14:33
Author: brianblais
Tags: Religion, Unbelievable Project
Slug: unbelievable-project-a-proxy-atheist-explains-why-he-cant-believe

Unbelievable? 10 Nov 2007 - A "proxy" atheist explains why he can't believe - 10 November 2007 -- Radio Host Nick Pandolfi on being a 'proxy atheist' {#unbelievable-10-nov-2007-a-proxy-atheist-explains-why-he-cant-believe-10-november-2007-radio-host-nick-pandolfi-on-being-a-proxy-atheist}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As part of the [Unbelievable Project][], I am taking notes and
"arm-chair" responding to each of the [Unbelievable podcast][] episodes
satisfying a set of [simple rules][Unbelievable Project].

For a full RSS Feed of the podcasts [see here][].

### Description of Episode

-   Full Title: *Unbelievable? 10 Nov 2007 - A "proxy" atheist explains
    why he can't believe - 10 November 2007 -- Radio Host Nick Pandolfi
    on being a 'proxy atheist'*  

    > Nick Pandolfi is a radio presenter and newspaper columnist.  He
    > says Religion has been the cause of war and conflict, and
    > Christians can't agree on what they believe.  Peter Williams of
    > the Damaris Trust speaks on behalf of faith in Jesus.

[Download mp3.][]

-   Justin Brierley - Christian Moderator
-   Peter Williams - Christian
-   Nick Pandolfi - Atheist

### Notes

Nick - (from his article, quote read by Justin) *"Religion can be what
you want it to be. A pick-and-mix victorious sponge God, or a full blown
hate-making factory. These religious folk don't exactly get on, do they?
How does religion explain its catastrophic failing to get on with
itself? No wonder people like me feel let down."*

**Me - I've heard it as *"The Big Book of Multiple Choice"*. An analogy
would be with simple proverbs (not the Biblical ones, although it might
work there). For any proverb, you can almost always find an opposite.
Consider the following two pairs:**

-   **"Haste makes waste", "A stitch in time saves nine"**
-   **"Too many cooks spoil the broth", "Many hands make light work"**

**Me - Each of these is correct, in some context, but we are are
responsible for following the correct edict in the correct context. We
do this naturally, and people who read the Bible do this too - they just
don't realize that it is they who are making the moral choices, not
simply following the moral edicts of the Bible.  
**

Nick - I find some atheists as ranting as some religious folks, and I
don't want to join that band. Hitting themselves all the time, moaning
about *"Christmas being stolen"*, or *"Christmas doesn't exist"*, *"I
don't believe in this"*, and *"I don't believe in that"*.

**Me - I'm with him there. Sometimes I think it goes a bit overboard.
However, when it comes to *public* funds being spent on *religious*
iconography, I have a problem. Things like the ten commandments in
judicial halls, or official school prayers in public schools.**

Nick - There is a lot of anger there, with Dawkins and Hitchens, etc...
and that's just not where he is. He feels it is *unlikely* for there to
be a God but that he doesn't know, that he can't know, but he also
doesn't want to go the other way to claim that there is a God.

**Me - this, to me, is atheism pure and simple, and I think that he is
really missing the definitions. even Dawkins would never say he *knows*
there is no God.**

Nick - I do believe that many people perhaps misrepresent faith or
perhaps misrepresent their God, but to me behave in a way that does not
seem particularly religious.

Peter - The fact that people do a lot of evil highlights one of the
truths that religion claims about the world that people are sinful and
that they need some kind of help to deal with that.

Nick - Religious people should know better, shouldn't they?

Peter - One should distinguish between people who do bad things
*against* the grain of what their theology teaches them vs people who do
bad things *along the line* of the ideology they follow. What would
happen if people followed Jesus' word seriously? Killing people is
clearly against the grain of what Jesus had in mind.

Peter - If you *really* follow Jesus, turn the other cheek, love your
enemy then the evil things shouldn't happen.

Nick - that's a great *"Get out of jail free"* card - if you follow the
rule book, then it won't happen. But it *happens*, has happened for far
too long, and will continue to happen.

**Me- On the *"Get out of jail free"*, I am in full agreement. This is
the *"no true Christian"* fallacy. If you claim to be a Christian, and
are good, then you're a *real* Christian. If you're not, you're not
really a Christian.**

Peter - this is not particular to religion, people who are irreligious
have done it, etc...

Nick - But you're bigger than politics, you're *religion*, you're
supposed to be better, you're supposed to be the shining light example.

**Me - I think Nick might be using the word *"religious"* in a way that
his host, and discussion partner, is not seeing. I think, if I can speak
for him, he means that religion claims the moral high ground. As such,
we should perhaps hold religious people to a higher standard. For
example, the pedophilia in the Catholic Church is a horrible thing. It
is that much worse given that the people involved claim to be morally
superior to others. When Nick says that religion should *"know better"*,
I think this is referring to the self-proclaimed moral superiority of
their religion over others in contract to the actions of those making
that claim.**

Nick - if you join a club, you pay your dues, and there are a certain
set of rules for that club to remain in the club. there are certain
definite rules for religious life, but the church will gladly take your
money so you can have your wedding there. they'll take your cash,
regardless of whether you will ever go back to that church again.

Nick - to respect an organization, you need to believe that *they*
believe in what they are selling. If you are going to have anyone
through your doors, whether they know anything about Jesus for example,
but take their money for weddings this is hypocritical. I would respect
a church a lot more if they would test people.

**Me - Yes, I agree. There is a hypocrisy in the churches, and in the
people, who want the benefits of calling themselves Christian when it
comes to baptism, weddings, and funerals (Hatched, Matched, and
Dispatched), but do not believe in the tennets of the church.  
**

Back to Peter's comment - What would happen if people followed Jesus'
word seriously?

**Me - I doubt that Peter really takes Jesus' words seriously. For
example, Matt 19:20 *"Jesus answered, "If you want to be perfect, go,
sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure
in heaven. Then come, follow me." "* and Matt 5:18 *"For truly I tell
you, until heaven and earth disappear, not the smallest letter, not the
least stroke of a pen, will by any means disappear from the Law until
everything is accomplished."* which pulls in all of those crazy Old
Testament *"kill you for this and that"* commands. Surely Peter will
have some rationalization for not following these, and also not
recognize the process by which he came by these rationalizations. He
probably would not admit that he is the arbiter of these choices, not
the Bible.**

  [Unbelievable Project]: https://brianblais.wordpress.com/2013/02/27/unbelievable-project-a-non-believers-armchair-perspective-on-six-years-of-christian-debates/
  [Unbelievable podcast]: http://www.premierradio.org.uk/shows/saturday/unbelievable.aspx
  [see here]: http://ondemand.premier.org.uk/unbelievable/AudioFeed.aspx
  [Download mp3.]: http://media.premier.org.uk/unbelievable/53a398dd-4e35-4854-8f87-84ef92fc1535.mp3
