Title: More unconvincing undesigned coincidences
status: draft
image: zwaddi-YvYBOSiBJE8-unsplash.jpg

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fomPHLGCpiA&list=WL&index=3&t=832s

> Brian: With the green grass example why couldn't the oral tradition have had the events around passover (with or without green grass) and Mark adds green grass as a literary flourish or John drops it? It'd be like a common story around Christmas, and one author mentions Christmas and the other snow. It doesn't seem to require, or even hint at, eyewitness testimony. It's so indirect -- like all of these undesigned coincidences -- when it would have been much more straightforward for Mark to have said "My name is Mark and I was there when...." like other ancient texts do.

> Testify: Again Brian you're using one example and not taking into consideration that the case is cumulative. It's not just "Christmas" and "snow" it's Philip, Bethsaida, how they were able to count, the woes pronounced, why a blind man wasn't allowed to return to the town and I still have not outlined all the undesigned coincidences in the feeding of the 5000, not to mention all of them in the gospels. Or if we really wanna go crazy, there's dozen of examples that are found in Paul's letters and Acts that cannot be explained at all by literary dependence or common knowledge. Also, "like other ancient text do?" Caesar’s commentary on the civil war is not only written formally anonymous but is written in the third person, not too unlike the style we see within the Gospel of John. We see similar things in Xenophon and at times Josephus as well, although Josephus also uses first person often too. While the third-person narrative style of the Gospels may be a departure from the writing style of many ancient historians, it is not much of a strike against them being eyewitness accounts or histories seeing that we it in Polybius, Nicolaus' History, Dexippus; Scythica. See our recent response to Captain Dadpool with me, Dr. Stephen Boyce and Inspiring Philosophy for more. If I were a skeptic I'd drop this one as bad atheist polemics. [https://www.youtube.com/live/5FIYZ4dUCxA?feature=share](https://www.youtube.com/live/5FIYZ4dUCxA?feature=share)


- Philip, Bethsaida -- as for the Philip-Bethsaida "coincidences", couldn't there have been a tradition that Philip was from Bethsaida? He could easily have been known as "Philip from Bethsaida" in the oral tradition, to keep him straight from other Philips -- which is different than your Bart Ehrman birthplace analogy. If there was such a tradition, then any event that took place in Bethsaida, or was claimed to take place in or near Bethsaida, might have had Philip inserted as a primary character. This seems pretty natural, and wouldn't require any eyewitnesses, or the truth of any of those events. You may think this line of thinking is speculative, but your argument is that the "unintended consequences" could not have easily been produced without eyewitness experience. No one can know for sure how these documents were written, and what they had access to, but it doesn't seem to me to be a stretch that there are processes that do not require eyewitnesses that could produce these. I think this is the kind of thing Paulogia was referring to.
- how they were able to count the 5000
-  the woes pronounced
- why a blind man wasn't allowed to return to the town  -- this seems easy too, that there is a common theme of having people not tell that the miracle happened for jesus (in mark)

> Brian: fair enough, but every one of those examples is not that convincing to me. there seem to be plausible ways to explain each one -- especially given that we have no originals, we know matthew and luke copied verbatim from mark, that there is likely to have been an oral tradition behind the stories. further, it ignores all of the gymnastics one has to do to harmonize what should be simple events, like the resurrection appearances, where legendary development seems to easily account for much of it. why so much indirect argumentation when it would have been trivial for the authors to have simply told us who they were and when and where they were writing?

> Brian: Another example -- counting the 5000. What if the number has nothing to do with the count, and is a reference to the old testament, like 2 Chronicles or Joshua where they refer to "5000 from the flocks" or "5000 men"? or perhaps because it's a nice round number (like 500 in paul) and could have been chosen for that reason. I see no strong reason to think this number was an actual count, so this "undesigned coincidence" doesn't seem compelling. Now, this is like the third "undesigned coincidence" that I've looked at, and come up with a plausible reason for in about 5 seconds of thinking. what does that do to the probability I'd assign to the next three I look at? given 1) how trivial finding plausible alternatives is and 2) the entire mode of argument would be made moot if the gospels followed the standards of ancient history, this entire approach seems to me to be a combination of cherry picking and seeing patterns in random data, both of which are common cognitive fallacies.


> 